<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>1 From UMAPs to Save Our Children: Policing Homosexuality in Cuba and Miami before 1980</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
      
      
		<h2>1 FROM UMAPs TO SAVE OUR CHILDREN</h2>
		<h4>Policing Homosexuality in Cuba and Miami before 1980</h4>
		
		<p>BY THE TIME THE MARIEL BOATLIFT BEGAN in 1980, male homosexuality was already political center stage in both Cuba and Miami. In Cuba during the late 1960s and early 1970s, male homosexuality and the gender-transgressive practices associated with it became the target of a state seeking to define itself and its citizenry. Male homosexuality was seen as a threat to the new communist nation, a vestige of American capitalism, and an entity truly foreign to the Cuban national project. An oppressive set of state policies, enforcement practices, and political discourses about masculinity, homosexuality, and the nation elevated male homosexuality into public, official visibility and played a formative role in the lives of the gay men who came to the United States during the Mariel migration.</p>
		<p>In Miami during the late 1970s gay men and lesbians also invoked a politics of visibility, although for very different purposes. During this period of redefinition for gay men and lesbians, the visibility of their community (achieved partly through coming out) became the foundation for claims to equal rights. While some successes were achieved both locally and nationally, these newfound rights and the visibility on which they were based became the target of conservatives who equated gay rights and gay visibility with a threat to American families and children. This organized, conservative backlash against gay rights led by the Christian entertainer Anita Bryant gained prominence precisely in Dade County, Florida, where the majority of Cuban immigrants had settled and where most Mariel immigrants would eventually arrive.</p>
		<p>The homosexual men who arrived as part of the Mariel boatlift were marked in profound ways by their experiences with an emerging Cuban state that wrestled with homosexuality as part of its project of national redefinition. Ironically, although these men were leaving Cuba to enter what many believed was a land of gay freedom, their point of entry into the United States was an urban center that had just become the birthplace of a conservative movement which sought to limit gay rights. In both Cuban and U.S. contexts, gay visibility was at the heart of both the repression of gay culture and of the struggle for gay rights.</p>
		<p>In this chapter, I argue that forms of homosexual political persecution in the United States and Cuba prior to the 1980 Mariel boatlift helped define the parameters of gay identification and political mobilization for the gay Mariel generation. On the one hand, what was understood to be visible homosexuality was targeted by the state in Cuba and by conservative political forces in the United States. On the other hand, homosexuals in Cuba and the United States were increasingly engaged in a politics of visibility that challenged these repressive forces. Although the form and cadence of these gay politics of visibility differed on either side of the Florida Straits, they would eventually come together on the tumultuous South Florida streets of the early 1980s.</p>
		<p>This chapter is divided in two parts. First, I discuss the Cuban state&#x2019;s repression of homosexuals between 1959 and 1980 and its focus on gender-transgressive male homosexuality. Second, I analyze ethnic and sexual politics in South Florida immediately preceding the boatlift, specifically the growing influence of Cuban Americans, the rise of a public gay culture, and the conservative backlash organized against the perceived threats represented by that culture. In relation to the campaign against gay rights, I am especially interested in how conservatives targeted gay visibility and in the visibility of Latinos on both sides of the gay rights struggle.</p>
		
		<h3>Homosexuality in Cuba, 1965&#x2013;80</h3>
		<p>After the 1959 Cuban Revolution, the homophobia and heterosexism that already existed in Cuba became more systematized and institutionalized<sup><a id="footnote_back1"></a><a href="#footnote1">1</a></sup>. Gender and sexuality explicitly entered political discourse, and vaguely worded laws were increasingly used to target gender-transgressive men believed to be homosexual. Fidel Castro clearly argued that the revolution was incompatible with homosexuality:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>We would never come to believe that a homosexual could embody the conditions and requirements of conduct that would enable us to consider him a true Revolutionary, a true Communist militant. A deviation of nature clashes with the concept we have of what a militant communist must be.<sup><a id="footnote_back2"></a><a href="#footnote2">2</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>From the mid-1960s to the late 1970s, the Cuban government defined homosexuality as a capitalist construct imported from America and a &#x201C;product of bourgeois decadence&#x201D; antithetical to the revolution.<sup><a id="footnote_back3"></a><a href="#footnote3">3</a></sup> Following this logic, the new revolutionary state targeted male homosexuals as part of its effort to &#x201C;recuperate the national dignity.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back4"></a><a href="#footnote4">4</a></sup></p>
		<p>The creation of a dignified society, revolutionaries believed, required the emergence of a &#x201C;New Socialist Man.&#x201D; As articulated by Ernesto Che Guevara, the concept of <span class="italic">el Hombre Nuevo </span>became a powerful, foundational revolutionary discourse that proposed productivity and socialist morality as essential to the formation of new Cuban identities and a new communist/socialist society.<sup><a id="footnote_back5"></a><a href="#footnote5">5</a></sup> The New Man and the homosexual became mutually constitutive categories, with the New Man representing the positive goal of revolutionary efforts and the homosexual embodying the vestiges of capitalist domination. The New Man needed to be masculine, virile, strong, healthy, hardworking, generous, motivated by a commitment to helping his fellow man, and willing to contribute economically, socially, and morally to the new Cuba. The New Man was most likely to emerge from rural areas of Cuba, which were believed to be less affected by capitalist intervention and free of urban vices such as homosexuality. In contrast, the homosexual was effeminate, nonproductive (and nonreproductive), weak, selfish, counter revolutionary, and decadently urban.<sup><a id="footnote_back6"></a><a href="#footnote6">6</a></sup> As the following statement by the Cuban revolutionary intellectual Samuel Feij&#xf3;o indicates, this opposition between the New Man and the homosexual was not just implied but clearly articulated and circulated in political discourse. Identifying the vice of homosexuality as &#x201C;one of the most nefarious and regrettable legacies of capitalism,&#x201D; Feij&#xf3;o laments that by 1965 the revolution had yet to eliminate it. His polemical article graphically characterizes how the revolution imagined the New Cuba and its Homosexual antagonist:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>We fight and will continue to fight against [homosexuality] until it is eradicated from a virile country, caught up in a life-and-death struggle against Yankee imperialism. And this extremely virile country, with its army of men, should not and cannot be represented by homosexual and pseudohomosexual writers and &#x201C;artists.&#x201D; Because no homosexual represents the revolution, which is a matter of men, of fists not feathers, of courage not trembling, of certainty not intrigue, of creative valor not syrupy surprises <span class="italic">[sorpresas merengosas].</span><sup><a id="footnote_back7"></a><a href="#footnote7">7</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>Trapped in this binary, the homosexual became the antithesis of the true revolutionary.</p>
		<p>This discourse was made operational in a series of laws and enforcement practices. The most extreme and well-known example was the establishment of reeducation camps known as Unidades Militares para el Aumento de Producci&#xf3;n (UMAPs) (Military Units for Increased Production). Beginning in 1965 (the same year Feij&#xf3;o published his article on vices and the revolution), homosexual men&#x2014;along with Jehovah&#x2019;s Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, and others defined as social deviants&#x2014;were sent to army special unit camps to be isolated from the general population and rehabilitated through military discipline and productive labor conducted in the purifying environment of rural Cuba.<sup><a id="footnote_back8"></a><a href="#footnote8">8</a></sup> It was thought that homosexuality, in particular, would be cured &#x201C;through performance of manly activities.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back9"></a><a href="#footnote9">9</a></sup></p>
		<p>The camps crystallized the Cuban state&#x2019;s position on homosexuality and its discourse about the relationship between productivity, gender, and homosexuality. Likewise, the camps provided a vivid and frightening example to homosexuals on and outside the island, an example that highlighted their marginal place in communist Cuba. Even though the camps themselves were short-lived, their example was not easily forgotten.<sup><a id="footnote_back10"></a><a href="#footnote10">10</a></sup> Although this experiment in social control still lurked in Cuban popular memory, many more Cuban homosexuals were personally affected by the routine persecutions of the 1960s and 1970s. These included informal exclusion from the Communist Party, individual arrests, <span class="italic">recogidas </span>or street sweeps of ostentatious homosexuals, and the exclusion of homosexuals from certain professions.<sup><a id="footnote_back11"></a><a href="#footnote11">11</a></sup></p>
		<p>Rafael, who left Cuba during the Mariel migration, characterized life in Cuba prior to 1980 in the following way:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>All&#225; nos divert&#xED;amos; &#xE9;ramos muy perseguidos, pero ya conviv&#xED;amos con la persecuci&#xf3;n. Ya era muy normal que te arrestaran, te metieran en un calabozo, te soltaran a la semana o los 28 d&#xED;as, y salir a la calle. Era como una rutina, una cosa muy normal.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">[In Cuba] we had fun; we were very persecuted, but we lived with the persecution. It was very normal for them to arrest you, stick you in a cell, and let you out in a week or twenty-eight days, and then back to the street. It was like a routine, a very normal thing.<sup><a id="footnote_back12"></a><a href="#footnote12">12</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p class="extraIndent">Several laws in the Cuban penal code justified the generalized persecution of homosexuals. In the early years of the revolution, the Cuban state continued to use the 1936 penal code. After extensive study and consideration, the code was revised in 1979, one year before the Mariel boatlift. During this massive revision, existing laws targeting homosexuals were updated, and some new sanctions were added.<sup><a id="footnote_back13"></a><a href="#footnote13">13</a></sup> These revisions give us some sense of how earlier laws aimed at homosexuals were already being interpreted by the new state. For example, laws concerning &#x201C;Esc&#225;ndalo P&#xfa;blico&#x201D; (&#x201C;Public Scandal&#x201D;) included both revisions and additions concerning homosexuality. First, the law was updated to replace older terminology like &#x201C;active or passive pederasty&#x201D; with modern equivalents like &#x201C;homosexual condition.&#x201D; The revised portion sanctioned anyone who &#x201C;would make a public display of their homosexual condition or importune or solicit another for [homosexual] purposes.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back14"></a><a href="#footnote14">14</a></sup> In addition, the 1979 version of the public scandal law included new sanctions against homosexual public sex&#x2014;penalizing public homosexual acts and private homosexual sex that could be involuntarily seen by others.<sup><a id="footnote_back15"></a><a href="#footnote15">15</a></sup> As the title of the relevant sections of both the 1936 and 1979 penal codes suggests, this law was centrally concerned with visibility: the updates of the law clarified the association between Esc&#225;ndalo P&#xfa;blico and homosexuals specifically to expand sanctions against visible homosexuality.</p>
		<p>Another law commonly used to target homosexuals as a deviant group did not explicitly mention homosexuality in either earlier or later versions of the penal code. In fact, the ambiguously worded Ley de Peligrosidad, or Law of Social Dangerousness, invoked a concept of pre-criminality; that is, it did not identify people who had committed an illegal act but rather those believed to have a high potential to violate laws.<sup><a id="footnote_back16"></a><a href="#footnote16">16</a></sup> Only slightly changed in 1979, the revised law defined social dangerousness as habitual behavior that demonstrated a &#x201C;special proclivity . . . to commit criminal acts, as demonstrated by observed conduct which is manifestly against the norms of socialist morality.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back17"></a><a href="#footnote17">17</a></sup> The 1979 code identified seven indices of social dangerousness including the &#x201C;exercise of socially repugnant vices&#x201D;&#x2014;changed from &#x201C;morally repugnant vices&#x201D; in the 1936 penal code.<sup><a id="footnote_back18"></a><a href="#footnote18">18</a></sup> Also, the revised code added a new index, &#x201C;antisocial conduct.&#x201D; As Ian Lumsden points out, &#x201C;In Cuba, <span class="italic">antisocial </span>has been a code word for allegedly ostentatious homosexuality, amongst other forms of &#x2019;deviant&#x2019; behavior.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back19"></a><a href="#footnote19">19</a></sup> Therefore, although the law against social dangerousness did not explicitly identify homosexuals, numerous reports indicate that prior to Mariel, visibly gay men were often arrested and charged under this law.<sup><a id="footnote_back20"></a><a href="#footnote20">20</a></sup></p>
		<p>Although homosexuality in general might have theoretically been the focus of this legal persecution, blatant gender transgression and effeminacy were the principal objects of the Cuban state gaze. Luis Salas argues that this was partly a response to the challenge of enforcing laws related to homosexuality:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>In the absence of actual proof as to the acts being performed, the police assume a wide array of suppositions in order to apprehend the homosexual. Thus, it is presumed in many instances that those persons that frequent certain places, dress in a set manner, and act in an effeminate way, or engage in specific professions are homosexuals.<sup><a id="footnote_back21"></a><a href="#footnote21">21</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>Long hair, tight pants, colorful shirts, effeminate mannerisms, &#x201C;inappropriate clothing,&#x201D; and &#x201C;extravagant hairstyles&#x201D; were seen as visible markers of male homosexuality.<sup><a id="footnote_back22"></a><a href="#footnote22">22</a></sup> These visible markers were not just a way to facilitate the enforcement of homosexual repression. Rather, visibility and gender transgressions themselves were a central part of the problem identified by the revolution. Even in the severest period of enforcement, Marvin Leiner reminds us, private homosexual expression was never the main target. Rather, &#x201C;during this period of the camps and public arrests, the major concern, as it had always been, was with the public display of homosexuality.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back23"></a><a href="#footnote23">23</a></sup> The gravest crime was not engaging in same-sex sexual acts per se but transgressing gender norms in ways associated with male homosexuality or, in other words, being visibly or obviously gay.</p>
		<p>In addition to criminal and police persecution, homosexuals were also excluded from certain forms of employment. Attempts to systematize these job restrictions emerged in 1971 out of the National Congress on Education and Culture. Although the congress declared that homosexuality was not a central or fundamental problem in Cuban society, its attention to and recommendations about homosexuality suggested otherwise. It defined homosexuality as a social pathology and &#x201C;resolved that all manifestations of homosexual deviations are to be firmly rejected and prevented from spreading.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back24"></a><a href="#footnote24">24</a></sup> Concerned about the influence of homosexuals on youth, the congress recommended that homosexuals be barred from educational positions where they could directly affect young people.<sup><a id="footnote_back25"></a><a href="#footnote25">25</a></sup> In the same spirit, it recommended that a study be made of how best to approach the &#x201C;presence of homosexuals in the different parts of our cultural sector&#x201D; because it was not &#x201C;permissible that because of their &#x2019;artistic merit,&#x2019; known homosexuals gain influence on the formation of our youth.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back26"></a><a href="#footnote26">26</a></sup></p>
		<p>The congress not only commented on the impact of cultural workers (writers, artists, etc.) on Cuban youth but also recommended that homosexuals be banned from artistically representing Cuba abroad. This additional recommendation revealed the revolution&#x2019;s concern with its own international image. Moreover, the language of the recommendations echoed Feij&#xf3;o, who advocated eliminating homosexuals from cultural positions as a project of &#x201C;revolutionary social hygiene.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back27"></a><a href="#footnote27">27</a></sup> Cuba needed real revolutionaries both domestically (to influence a new generation) and internationally (to represent the &#x201C;virile&#x201D; nation of &#x201C;men&#x201D;). As Feij&#xf3;o clarified, &#x201C;Real revolutionary literature is not and never will be written by sodomites.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back28"></a><a href="#footnote28">28</a></sup></p>
		<p>The emphasis on visibility is clear in the labor restrictions passed in 1974 upon the congress&#x2019;s recommendation. The labor (not penal) code indicated that people could be dismissed from their jobs and reassigned to another field for practicing</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
	<p>homosexualism, publicly known, and other reproachable forms of conduct, which projected publicly, may have a negative influence on the education, conscience or public feelings of children and young persons, by those persons employed in cultural activities or artistic recreative functions and presenting themselves through public means of diffusion.<sup><a id="footnote_back29"></a><a href="#footnote29">29</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>As written, the law repeatedly targets homosexuals who are &#x201C;publicly known&#x201D; and who project themselves &#x201C;publicly.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>Homosexuals in revolutionary Cuba were subjected to frequent repression by police, restrictions in terms of employment, and distaste in popular sentiment, but the state gaze fixated on gender-transgressive male homosexuals&#x2014;or obvious gays. For all practical purposes, these political discourses, laws, forms of enforcement, and labor restrictions penalized looking gay.<sup><a id="footnote_back30"></a><a href="#footnote30">30</a></sup> The appearance of homosexuality was key. As Carlos Alberto Montaner explains in his decidedly anti-Castro account:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>The government wasn&#x2019;t concerned with&#x2014;it&#x2019;s never concerned with&#x2014;realities, but with appearances. It wants masculine men, with shortly trimmed hair, loose fitting pants, perfect guayaberas, even if that outfit was hiding an effeminate creature <span class="italic">[una criatura feminoide]. </span>What was important was the damn image of the revolution.<sup><a id="footnote_back31"></a><a href="#footnote31">31</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>The state&#x2019;s concern with appearances and public display were accompanied by formal antihomosexual state actions directed specifically at male homosexuals who were visible to the public.</p>
		<p>Visible homosexuals were also subjected to more informal forms of social control. For example, one of my respondents, Armando, who left Cuba as part of the Mariel boatlift, described how he was blocked from pursuing a career as a teacher. He begins his story by drawing attention to the visibility of his homosexuality: &#x201C;I wanted to be a teacher, and I don&#x2019;t consider myself very butch. I know I&#x2019;m obvious, like you talk to me for a while, [and] you know I&#x2019;m gay.&#x201D; Although he saw his own homosexuality as obvious and visible to others, he was hopeful about getting a job as a teacher because his father had connections in the Ministry of Education. Although his father&#x2019;s connection was &#x201C;muy amable&#x201D; (very nice/kind/helpful), his efforts to find employment were continually blocked:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>Hasta al fin una se&#xf1;ora un d&#xED;a me dijo, &#x201C;&#xbf;T&#xfa; crees que,&#x201D;&#x2014;Y fue muy amable, al dec&#xED;rmelo, fue muy nice. Eso lo tengo que decir. Pero ella me dijo&#x2014;&#x201C;que cuando t&#xfa; te pares delante de una aula de muchachos de quince y diecis&#xE9;is, diecisiete a&#xf1;os, t&#xfa; tengas el car&#225;cter para, para que esos muchachos te respeten, siendo t&#xfa; como eres?&#x201D; Me dijo as&#xED; mismo, y yo dije bueno, that&#x2019;s true. So I went for accounting.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">Until finally one day a lady told me, &#x201C;Do you think that,&#x201D;&#x2014;And she was very nice when she told me. I have to admit that. But she said to me&#x2014;&#x201C;when you get up in front of a classroom filled with fifteen-, sixteen-, and seventeen-year-old kids, do you think you are going to have the character [strength of personality] to get those kids to respect you, being the way you are?&#x201D; She said it just like that, and I said, well, that&#x2019;s true. So I went for accounting.</p>
      </div>
      
		<p>Armando&#x2019;s account illustrates one of many, often unofficial ways in which homosexuals were dissuaded from seeking certain lines of employment. Specifically, he was steered away from a field where his visibility or obvious homosexuality was seen as a problem because of its potential impact on youth; thus, he resigned himself to a profession where visibility mattered less, accounting. While the logic of this restriction was clearly strengthened by the Congress&#x2019;s declarations and the labor law that followed, in Armando&#x2019;s case&#x2014;perhaps because of his father&#x2019;s connections&#x2014;he was not formally restricted and thus avoided a more public outing and humiliation. By his account, he was treated &#x201C;nicely,&#x201D; a benefit not extended to everyone.</p>
		<p>The Cuban state&#x2019;s efforts might have been geared toward making homosexuality invisible by eradicating homosexuals from the public sphere, but state labeling and control strategies actually increased the visibility of male homosexuality as it promoted its constitutive other, the revolutionary, virile, masculine New Man.<sup><a id="footnote_back32"></a><a href="#footnote32">32</a></sup> Jos&#xE9; Quiroga captures the irony of the Cuban state&#x2019;s focus on the visibility of male homosexuality:</p>
		
      <div class="blockquote">
		<p>The revolution itself rendered the issue of homosexuality <span class="italic">visible </span>in the first place&#x2014;visible in the sense of its being transparent to the society as a whole. As early as 1962 . . . the Cuban Revolution already indexed homosexuality as a condition that needed to be extirpated in order to fulfill an economic and political program that in turn became affixed to the nationalist ideology.<sup><a id="footnote_back33"></a><a href="#footnote33">33</a></sup></p>
      </div>
      
		<p>Specifically, the Cuban state designated an already stigmatized form of male homosexuality as outside revolutionary culture. The revolutionary state identified specific manifestations of homosexuality as problematic: visible manifestations of effeminacy and transgressions of accepted masculinity. For homosexual Cuban men who experienced this period of the revolution, visibility was political, whether they liked it or not. And, as Reinaldo Arenas explains, Cuban homosexuals countered state repression with defiant acts of homosexual visibility:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>There was another powerful homosexual scene in Havana, underground but very visible. . . . I think that in Cuba there was never more fucking going on than in those years, the decade of the sixties, which was precisely when all the new laws against homosexuals came into being, when the persecutions started and concentration camps were opened, when the sexual act became taboo while the &#x201C;new man&#x201D; was being proclaimed and masculinity exalted. . . . I think that the sexual revolution in Cuba actually came about as a result of the existing sexual repression. Perhaps as a protest against the regime, homosexuality began to flourish with ever-increasing defiance. . . . I honestly believe that the concentration camps for homosexuals, and the police officers disguised as willing young men to entrap and arrest homosexuals, actually resulted in the promotion of homosexual activities.<sup><a id="footnote_back34"></a><a href="#footnote34">34</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>As Arenas describes, the identification of male gender transgression as a threat to the communist state and the heightened persecution of those thought to transgress the boundaries of acceptable gender behavior were accompanied by defiant homosexual cultures. These defiant acts of visibility were pesky reminders to the state that its attempts to remove homosexuals from the public sphere (by sending them to UMAPs, incarcerating them, and discriminating against them) were ultimately unsuccessful. The Mariel boatlift would provide yet another opportunity for the Cuban state to eliminate the gender-transgressive homosexuality that continued to exist despite clearly articulated policies against it. By encouraging and/or permitting gender-transgressive homosexuals to leave the country during the boatlift, the Cuban state would try to export the defiant cultures of gay visibility that continued to trouble its virile self-image.<sup><a id="footnote_back35"></a><a href="#footnote35">35</a></sup></p>
		
		<h3>Cuban Americans and Gay Rights:  The Anita Bryant Campaign and Its Aftermath</h3>
		<p>It is ironic that while homosexuals in Cuba were targeted because of their presumed association with capitalism, homosexuals in postwar America had been targeted because of their presumed association with communism. The post&#x2013;World War II period in the United States brought with it a chilling conservative climate in which anticommunism became increasingly linked with homophobia.<sup><a id="footnote_back36"></a><a href="#footnote36">36</a></sup> During the McCarthy era, as homosexuals became targets of the House Un-American Activities Committee, gay and lesbian activists responded with a &#x201C;plea for tolerance&#x201D; from mainstream society.<sup><a id="footnote_back37"></a><a href="#footnote37">37</a></sup> By the 1970s, however, young lesbian and gay activists had broken with their predecessors, whom they saw as accommodationists, and had begun to promote a more militant and defiant political strategy.</p>
		<p>A central component of this new political strategy was the belief that group visibility was the foundation for political struggle. Dennis Altman argues that &#x201C;between 1969 and 1980 the basic strategy of the movement [was] one of coming out, asserting homosexual visibility as a basis for demanding certain basic rights.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back38"></a><a href="#footnote38">38</a></sup> John D&#x2019;Emilio explains further that this generation of activists understood coming out as &#x201C;the first essential step toward freedom&#x201D;: he indicates, &#x201C;they acted on their beliefs by being as visible as they could in every sphere of life.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back39"></a><a href="#footnote39">39</a></sup> Thus, during the same period that the Cuban state was repressing visible expressions of male homosexuality, homosexual men and women in the United States were making themselves increasingly visible in order to assert political claims about their rights.</p>
		<p>With the increased visibility of gay men and lesbians during the 1970s, gay political goals, especially the passage of antidiscrimination legislation and ordinances, were slowly becoming reality.<sup><a id="footnote_back40"></a><a href="#footnote40">40</a></sup> Although cities like New York and San Francisco were at the center of gay and lesbian activism, South Florida gays and lesbians could also claim some political victories, including successful legal challenges of local and state laws used to persecute homosexuals.<sup><a id="footnote_back41"></a><a href="#footnote41">41</a></sup> In January 1977, local gay activists achieved their most significant political achievement to date. Under the leadership of Jack Campbell, Bob Kunst, and Robert Basker (who had recently been expelled from Cuba after trying to organize Cuban gays and lesbians during a trip to visit his children), the Dade County Coalition for the Humanistic Rights of Gays convinced the Dade County Commission to amend the county&#x2019;s existing human rights statute to include &#x201C;affectional and sexual preference.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back42"></a><a href="#footnote42">42</a></sup> After its introduction by Commissioner Ruth Shack, the commission voted 5&#x2013;3 to pass the amendment to ban discrimination against gay men and lesbians &#x201C;in the areas of housing, public accommodations, and employment.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back43"></a><a href="#footnote43">43</a></sup></p>
		<p>One of Commissioner Shack&#x2019;s former supporters, Anita Bryant, attended the public hearing on the proposed amendment. Bryant, a South Florida resident, was a popular Christian entertainer who served as the national spokesperson for the Florida Citrus Commission and was represented by Shack&#x2019;s husband, a booking agent. At the hearing of what they considered an appalling amendment, Bryant and her husband, the former disc jockey Bob Green, reportedly met Bob Brake, another conservative moral reformer who had previously tried to ban local theaters from screening <span class="italic">Woodstock.</span><sup><a id="footnote_back44"></a><a href="#footnote44">44</a></sup> After sharing their outrage about the proposed amendment, they founded the organization, Save Our Children Inc. (SOC), which mounted an emotional campaign to collect signatures in support of their efforts to repeal the gay antidiscrimination ordinance.<sup><a id="footnote_back45"></a><a href="#footnote45">45</a></sup> SOC&#x2019;s successful petition drive forced the commission to choose between repealing the amendment they had just passed or letting the issue be decided by referendum. On March 14, 1977, the commission voted to allow a referendum on the amendment. This meant that the issue of gay rights would be decided by a countywide public vote.</p>
		<p>In the widely publicized media debate that followed, SOC appealed to public sentiment in order to challenge the gay rights amendment. SOC argued that &#x201C;homosexuals who keep their sexual activity in the privacy of their homes face NO discrimination or recrimination from society&#x201D;; consequently, they did not need legal protection.<sup><a id="footnote_back46"></a><a href="#footnote46">46</a></sup> Rather than being victims of discrimination, SOC argued, homosexuals posed a threat to society. While gay activists asserted their civil rights to equal opportunity, SOC interpreted this public assertion of homosexuals&#x2019; rights as a threat to American families and children. An SOC-sponsored advertisement labeled the antidiscrimination ordinance an &#x201C;INVITATION TO RECRUIT OUR CHILDREN.&#x201D; They argued that &#x201C;the recruitment of our children is absolutely necessary for the survival and growth of homosexuality&#x2014;for since homosexuals cannot reproduce, they must recruit, must refreshen their ranks.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back47"></a><a href="#footnote47">47</a></sup> The association of homosexuality with child molestation, &#x201C;recruitment,&#x201D; and other threats was repeated time and again in SOC newspaper advertisements and reiterated in newspaper articles on the SOC campaign. This scare tactic proved highly effective in mobilizing voters.</p>
		<p>SOC also distinguished between overt and covert homosexuals, identifying the most visible as the biggest threat. Altman argues that the &#x201C;effectiveness of [the visibility/coming-out] strategy was demonstrated by the fact that it was precisely the open declaration of homosexuality that was most opposed by homophobes . . . who sought to link it with a threat to children.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back48"></a><a href="#footnote48">48</a></sup> Indeed, when Bryant discussed SOC&#x2019;s antigay campaign, she associated the threat of homosexuality with identifiable out-homosexuals. Questioned on the issue, she explained: &#x201C;Well, if the person&#x2019;s in the closet, and they&#x2019;re not flaunting their homosexuality in front of my children, then there&#x2019;s no threat that I can see.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back49"></a><a href="#footnote49">49</a></sup> Asked further about a case of a veteran lesbian teacher who lived in fear of being discovered, Bryant responded with ostensible sympathy:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>A lot of people like myself might not have been aware of these nice, intelligent, warm, articulate individuals who didn&#x2019;t want to tell me their sexual preference or flaunt it on my children. They were happy to live their own lives and I was happy to let them.</p>
		<p>But with this ordinance, you are dealing with a totally different kind of individual. They&#x2019;re militant, they have used their sexual preference to become a political bloc, and they&#x2019;re not satisfied with staying in their own backyard.<sup><a id="footnote_back50"></a><a href="#footnote50">50</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Presenting a unified message, Bryant and SOC claimed a sympathetic tolerance of homosexuals who were discreetly in the closet while identifying gay visibility or &#x201C;flaunting&#x201D; as the gravest threat to American children and families.</p>
		<p>In contrast to SOC&#x2019;s apparently unified front, gay rights activists ended up fighting for the antidiscrimination ordinance (and against repeal) under a divided umbrella. The organization that originally lobbied for the amendment, the Dade County Coalition for the Humanistic Rights of Gays, had emerged out of a July 1976 coalition-building meeting of representatives from different local gay organizations held at Campbell&#x2019;s house on Basker&#x2019;s recommendation.<sup><a id="footnote_back51"></a><a href="#footnote51">51</a></sup> The nondiscrimination ordinance was the first major goal of this &#x201C;loose coalition&#x201D; of eleven South Florida groups.<sup><a id="footnote_back52"></a><a href="#footnote52">52</a></sup></p>
		<p>Attempting to broaden its appeal, the organization that spearheaded the amendment changed its name to the Dade County Coalition for Human Rights (DCCHR) &#x201C;in a move designed to enlist more support for the gay community.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back53"></a><a href="#footnote53">53</a></sup> As the campaign took on national significance, the coalition&#x2019;s insufficient funding became apparent. In response, wealthy national gay leader David Goodstein stepped in, providing financial support, bringing in professional political consultants (like Ethan Geto), and helping set the tone of the campaign.<sup><a id="footnote_back54"></a><a href="#footnote54">54</a></sup> Leonard Matlovich, who had recently become a Miami resident and whose well-publicized challenge to the military ban on homosexuals led to his dismissal from the air force in 1975, was named campaign spokesperson. In contrast to Basker&#x2019;s background in community organizing and gay liberation, Goodstein and Geto hoped to be part of a &#x201C;gay rights era&#x201D; that favored a professional political strategy and distanced itself from direct action and grassroots political organizing.<sup><a id="footnote_back55"></a><a href="#footnote55">55</a></sup></p>
		<p>In South Florida, Geto produced a &#x201C;professionally directed media campaign&#x201D; that emphasized human rights issues by drawing on images of the &#x201C;endangered American constitution&#x201D; and arguing that the erosion of rights for gay men and lesbians would lead to the erosion of rights for other minority groups, especially Jews and blacks.<sup><a id="footnote_back56"></a><a href="#footnote56">56</a></sup> The DCCHR&#x2019;s &#x201C;high-toned&#x201D; appeal to human rights backfired, as local newspapers took to referring to its professional consultants as &#x201C;imported talent.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back57"></a><a href="#footnote57">57</a></sup> As a consequence, the DCCHR&#x2019;s efforts were not nearly as effective as the emotionally charged campaign waged by SOC, portrayed in the media as a community-based organization despite its extensive national network.</p>
		<p>In addition to accusations that the coalition was run by outsiders, dissent also predominated among local gays and lesbians. For one thing, the coalition was primarily male and primarily Anglo. As the gendered attacks on Bryant became more intense&#x2014;she was referred to as a &#x201C;bitch,&#x201D; &#x201C;whore,&#x201D; and so on&#x2014;feminists and lesbians became increasingly uncomfortable with the campaign&#x2019;s misogynistic tone.<sup><a id="footnote_back58"></a><a href="#footnote58">58</a></sup> Discussing the group&#x2019;s gender and racial composition at the weekly coalition meetings held at the upscale Candlelight Club (owned by coalition member Bob Stickney), Jesse Monteagudo added that &#x201C;most of the participants were men&#x2014;a state of affairs that would continue to hold true throughout the organization&#x2019;s history; there were no blacks, and only a handful of Latinos.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back59"></a><a href="#footnote59">59</a></sup> As I show, these racial/ethnic tensions would continue to plague the coalition and the battle for gay rights in Miami.</p>
		<p>Perhaps sensing defeat, perhaps seeking the media limelight, Kunst, the most controversial and provocative of the gay rights leaders, left the coalition to found the Miami Victory Campaign along with the bisexual psychologist Alan Rockway.<sup><a id="footnote_back60"></a><a href="#footnote60">60</a></sup> The coalition announced the split in a letter to supporters, &#x201C;Unfortunately, Mr. Kunst cannot agree to operate under the banner of the coalition and is not a representative of our organization. Also, he does not represent the overwhelming majority of the gay community here in Miami.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back61"></a><a href="#footnote61">61</a></sup> Described in a <span class="italic">Miami Herald </span>article as &#x201C;the most visible of Miami homosexuals,&#x201D; Kunst deliberately courted both local and national media. Although other gay rights supporters saw him as a &#x201C;loudmouth maverick, a headline grabber, &#x2019;an embarrassment,&#x2019; &#x201D; Kunst and the Miami Victory Campaign engaged in fund-raising activities and campaigned hard for the antidiscrimination ordinance.<sup><a id="footnote_back62"></a><a href="#footnote62">62</a></sup></p>
		<p>While the Coalition and Miami Victory Campaign pursued their divergent strategies, a lesser-known organization, Latinos pro Derechos Humanos or Latins for Human Rights, emerged in the fight against Bryant and SOC.<sup><a id="footnote_back63"></a><a href="#footnote63">63</a></sup> Allied with the coalition, this group of gay and lesbian Latino activists struggled for their place within the gay rights struggle. As I discuss below, the work of this organization and the challenges it faced complicate the conventional wisdom about Cuban American participation in the gay rights issue.</p>
		<p>Despite the effort of these diverse gay rights groups, on June 7, 1977, the Human Rights Ordinance was repealed by referendum. The vote was not close: 70 percent, or 202,319 voters, favored the repeal of the antidiscrimination measure.<sup><a id="footnote_back64"></a><a href="#footnote64">64</a></sup> The high voter turnout for a special election (45 percent of registered voters participated) suggests the effectiveness of SOC rhetoric.<sup><a id="footnote_back65"></a><a href="#footnote65">65</a></sup> Moreover, with extensive media coverage, a national audience watched as Dade County became the first major metropolitan area in the United States to overturn an antidiscrimination gay rights statute, but where did Miami Cubans stand on this very public debate about visibility, sexuality, and family values?</p>
		
		<h3>Conventional Wisdom: Cuban Support for Bryant</h3>
		<p>In the late 1970s Cubans were becoming a major presence in South Florida. Not yet the dominant economic and political force they would soon become, their increasing numbers and their growing awareness that their migration to the United States was not temporary contributed to their importance. In recognition of that fact, Bryant and the SOC actively courted the Latino/Cuban American vote. The SOC produced pamphlets in Spanish quoting Jos&#xE9; Mart&#xED;, the hero of the Cuban war for independence from Spain (&#x201C;Children are the hope of the future&#x201D;), and they put together a &#x201C;Latin delegation&#x201D; who could speak with Spanish-language media. Moreover, Bryant held a rally with Cuban Americans in the Little Havana Community Center, during which she made introductory remarks in Spanish and geared her comments toward the Cuban audience.<sup><a id="footnote_back66"></a><a href="#footnote66">66</a></sup></p>
		<p>Diverse reports from the late 1970s suggest that this lobbying was successful and Cuban Americans strongly supported Bryant. The scholar&#x2013;activist Martin Duberman, for example, claimed that she was &#x201C;heavily supported&#x201D; by &#x201C;the Cuban community.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back67"></a><a href="#footnote67">67</a></sup> In a televised news report, Walter Cronkite asserted that the strongest support for repeal came from Cuban voters.<sup><a id="footnote_back68"></a><a href="#footnote68">68</a></sup> In her own political/religious testimonial, Bryant acknowledged the &#x201C;overwhelming support we received from the Latin community&#x201D; and stated that the gay rights &#x201C;issue became a unifying force for Latin and Anglo church groups in Miami.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back69"></a><a href="#footnote69">69</a></sup> Thus gay rights activists, the mainstream media, and Bryant herself seemed to agree on one thing: Cuban Americans were pro-Bryant.</p>
		<p>Most scholars have reiterated this assessment. For example, writing in the mid-1980s, B. Ruby Rich and Lourdes Arg&#xFC;elles argued that the Bryant initiative inspired Cuban Americans to participate more actively in the U.S. political process than they had in the past.</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>During the 1960s and early 1970s, Cubans had shown little interest in social issues that originated outside the enclave; this time, however, Cubans responded feverishly in favor of the Bryant initiative. Community leaders organized demonstrations and registered new Cuban voters. C., a social worker, suggests reasons for the massive Cuban mobilization: &#x201C;They were seeing their kids getting lost in all the &#x2018;depravity.&#x2019; They felt this was a way to stop it, to stop change.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back70"></a><a href="#footnote70">70</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Although Rich and Arg&#xFC;elles&#x2019;s article is about gay and lesbian Cuban Americans, they characterized Cuban Americans in general as &#x201C;feverishly&#x201D; supporting Bryant and opposing gay rights.<sup><a id="footnote_back71"></a><a href="#footnote71">71</a></sup></p>
		<p>Newspaper reports also seem to indicate that Cubans supported repeal. Coverage in the <span class="italic">Miami Herald </span>mostly confirms the predicted pattern: Jewish voters were more likely to vote for the amendment; black voters were least likely to come out to vote either way; and Cuban voters were more likely to vote for repeal. On the day after the election, the <span class="italic">Herald </span>reported that the &#x201C;greatest repeal margins appeared to come from heavily Cuban and single-family home, middle-class neighborhoods.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back72"></a><a href="#footnote72">72</a></sup> An analysis of selected precincts published the same day further confirms this analysis. Of selected precincts, Little Havana, the emerging center of the Cuban American enclave, had the largest percentage of voters (85.8 percent) supporting repeal. The <span class="italic">Herald </span>also added that 887 of the total 1,460 registered voters in the precinct were &#x201C;Latins.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back73"></a><a href="#footnote73">73</a></sup> In a more detailed analysis a few days later, the <span class="italic">Herald </span>added that &#x201C;in a few spots in Hialeah the percentage soared past 90 as &#x2019;rednecks&#x2019; and Cubans found an issue on which they could join forces.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back74"></a><a href="#footnote74">74</a></sup></p>
		<p>Although <span class="italic">Herald </span>polls generally support the consensus that Cubans were homophobic and supported Bryant, there is also more ambivalent evidence. Whereas Rich and Arg&#xFC;elles argue that Cubans were inspired to vote by this domestic issue, reporters at the time commented on the low level of voter participation at the Little Havana precinct.<sup><a id="footnote_back75"></a><a href="#footnote75">75</a></sup> Only 43 percent of registered voters participated in the special election compared with the 73.5 percent who voted in the November general election: &#x201C;Election officials attributed lower turnout to low interest among Latins in local, as opposed to national, elections.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back76"></a><a href="#footnote76">76</a></sup> Also interesting is the apparent ethnic identity of interviewed voters who self-identified as gay/homosexual. In the extensive coverage of the election in the <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>many voters were asked why they voted for or against repeal. Only three people are quoted as stating that they supported the ordinance because they themselves were gay/homosexual. Of these all are men, and the two identified by name both have Spanish surnames and were interviewed at precincts with substantial Hispanic populations. For example, Jose Espino of North Hialeah stated that he was a homosexual and added: &#x201C;I don&#x2019;t think that any minority group should be singled out for any sort of discrimination.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back77"></a><a href="#footnote77">77</a></sup></p>
		<p>Whereas evidence that Cubans supported Bryant is reinforced by conventional wisdom about the conservativeness of Cubans in Miami, these attitudes about the Cuban community actually predate the election (as I show below). There is also some evidence, even in superficial newspaper coverage, that Latinos/Hispanics were part of an out-homosexual voting public that openly supported the ordinance.</p>
		
		<h3>Challenging Conventional Wisdom: Latino Gay Activists</h3>
		<p>While it is clear that SOC did get significant support from many Cuban Americans in Miami, Cubans were also an important component of the emerging gay community in South Florida and were among the activists who struggled for gay rights before, during, and after the 1977 battle. The struggles of these Latino pioneers and the short life of Latins for Human Rights (LHR) points to the difficulties Latino gay men and lesbians faced with regard to both the mainstream Cuban American community and the gay community.</p>
		<p>Latinos were active participants in the growing South Florida gay scene. Lamenting the absence of a politically active Cuban gay community, the chairperson of LHR, Monteagudo, nevertheless described immersing himself in a &#x201C;Cuban gay male scene&#x201D; in the early 1970s with frequent visits to &#x201C;bars, beaches, and <span class="italic">posadas </span>(pay-by-the-hour motels).&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back78"></a><a href="#footnote78">78</a></sup> Already gay clubs catered to a Latino clientele, including Club Miami, described by Monteagudo as &#x201C;particularly popular among youthful Latinos and their Anglo admirers.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back79"></a><a href="#footnote79">79</a></sup> The centrality of gender transgressions in the Cuban American neighborhood of Little Havana in Southwest Miami was clear even to an ambivalent Monteagudo:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>I was able to enjoy many of the pleasures Little Habana&#x2019;s gay demimonde had to offer. From other gay Cubans I learned how to dress (bell bottom pants and platform shoes were then the rage&#x2014;I almost fell off one of those shoes!), to stay up late, to hold my liquor, to cruise, and deal with rejection (nonchalantly). I even &#x201C;learned&#x201D; to camp it up, adopt an effeminate pose, and to refer to myself and others as &#x201C;she&#x201D;&#x2014;though this was something I never cared for. There were probably more drag queens per square foot in Little Habana than anywhere in South Florida!<sup><a id="footnote_back80"></a><a href="#footnote80">80</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>As described by Monteagudo, this scene had the shared fashions, values, and languages of an easily identifiable gay community (even if that community was not necessarily out by U.S. standards). While Monteagudo&#x2019;s account reveals the presence of an elaborate Cuban gay male culture in Miami, his point is to highlight its political apathy. As he wrote for the gay newspaper <span class="italic">TWN, </span>&#x201C;Latin involvement in the gay scene is limited to bars.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back81"></a><a href="#footnote81">81</a></sup> For Monteagudo, the Little Havana <span class="italic">locas</span> who camped it up and referred to themselves as &#x201C;she&#x201D; were not the face of a political future.</p>
		<p>While frustration with the lack of political response by Cuban homosexuals and lesbians during the Bryant campaign is certainly understandable, the activities of both drag queens and men who embraced an effeminate swagger in daily life can also be analyzed within the broader racial dynamic of the gay South. James T. Sears argues that during the mid-1970s, in the South as opposed to the North, the heroes &#x201C;were not gay liberationists with queer placards and clenched fists but heroines adorned with rouge and rhinestones. Southern drag queens did more than imitate Vivien Leigh; they stood resolute against the ravaging of their homosexual Taras.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back82"></a><a href="#footnote82">82</a></sup> The place of gender transgression for men of color was even more important. &#x201C;Although a few gay men of color . . . were involved in political activities during this era,&#x201D; Sears argues that &#x201C;nonwhites were generally absent from southern corridors of gay power. In the South the only gay province for the &#x2019;talented tenth&#x2019; of men of color was female impersonation.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back83"></a><a href="#footnote83">83</a></sup></p>
		<p>Among the few men of color who did walk through the corridors of gay power were Monteagudo and his mentor, Alexias Ram&#xf3;n Muni.<sup><a id="footnote_back84"></a><a href="#footnote84">84</a></sup> Described by Sears as a &#x201C;dark, husky, bearded Cuban &#xE9;migr&#xE9;,&#x201D; Muni attended the first meeting at Campbell&#x2019;s house where the coalition was formed.<sup><a id="footnote_back85"></a><a href="#footnote85">85</a></sup> As the battle between gay rights activists and Bryant&#x2019;s SOC campaign began to heat up, Muni also participated in forming LHR, along with Monteagudo, Manolo G&#xf3;mez, Victor L&#xf3;pez, Lidia Mart&#xED;nez, and Ovidio Heriberto &#x201C;Herbie&#x201D; Ramos.<sup><a id="footnote_back86"></a><a href="#footnote86">86</a></sup> Robert Roth, publisher of a gay rights newsletter, commented that the formation of this group was &#x201C;one of the most important and far-reaching developments of the whole Florida campaign.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back87"></a><a href="#footnote87">87</a></sup></p>
		<p>During the short life of this organization, members were hard-hit by a series of tragedies whose ultimate causes still remain unclear. Ramos&#x2019;s suicide was the first in a string of incidents. Soon after LHR formed, representatives from the group, including Ramos, Monteagudo, Muni, and G&#xf3;mez, appeared on Spanish-language radio to discuss the gay rights amendment.<sup><a id="footnote_back88"></a><a href="#footnote88">88</a></sup> According to Perry Deane Young, SOC&#x2019;s &#x201C;Latin delegation&#x201D; had agreed to appear only if the &#x201C;homosexuals repented their &#x2019;sins&#x2019; and agreed to seek treatment.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back89"></a><a href="#footnote89">89</a></sup> When LHR members refused these conditions, SOC sent a recording to be used on the show. Because both sides of the debate were not represented in the studio, the moderator did not allow LHR to respond to calls. Monteagudo said LHR members were &#x201C;shocked by the hatred spewed by callers, which was extreme even by Miami Spanish talk show standards.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back90"></a><a href="#footnote90">90</a></sup> Ramos, who was described as &#x201C;very effeminate&#x201D; and &#x201C;campy,&#x201D; was struggling with his own family&#x2019;s rejection of his homosexuality and seemed especially troubled by the calls from Cuban Americans attacking them.<sup><a id="footnote_back91"></a><a href="#footnote91">91</a></sup> He reportedly told his best friend, &#x201C;I didn&#x2019;t know they hated us so much.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back92"></a><a href="#footnote92">92</a></sup> The day after the radio show, Ramos unsuccessfully attempted suicide. The following day, March 16, 1977, he succeeded by shooting himself in the head.</p>
		<p>Ramos&#x2019;s suicide became a symbol of the costs of hateful homophobia in the gay community. Writing at the time, Monteagudo explained:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>On the 16th our Brother Ovidio Ramos (also my best friend) committed suicide, as a result of many causes, including the problem of coping with his homosexuality. The Coalition and the Latinos used this as a campaign issue (all&#x2019;s fair in love and war).<sup><a id="footnote_back93"></a><a href="#footnote93">93</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Ramos&#x2019;s tragic suicide became an opportunity to increase the visibility of gay Latinos, to highlight the types of oppression faced by gay men and lesbians, and to provide a vivid example of the consequences of oppression. In the hands of LHR spokesperson G&#xf3;mez, an &#x201C;openly gay journalist working on <span class="italic">Cosmopolitan</span>&#x2019;s Spanish edition and a &#x2019;public relations whiz,&#x2019; &#x201D; Ramos became a &#x201C;gay legend.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back94"></a><a href="#footnote94">94</a></sup> Monteagudo explained:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>Manolo [G&#xf3;mez] saw [Ramos&#x2019;s] death as an opportunity to launch a public relations campaign that would help our cause. Before the end of the week, &#x201C;Ovidio&#x201D; Ramos became a symbol of gay oppression. We told the world he was a budding activist who was hounded to his death by uncaring parents and by bigots who called the radio station to heap abuse on this sensitive young victim.<sup><a id="footnote_back95"></a><a href="#footnote95">95</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>The image of Ovidio Ramos took on a life of its own. Expressing apparent discomfort with the public relations use of his friend&#x2019;s death, Monteagudo later stated that the strategy was &#x201C;unfair to the elder Ramoses, a kindly old couple who did the best to get along with their unruly son. . . . We made him out into a martyr for the gay cause, but he was always suicidal.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back96"></a><a href="#footnote96">96</a></sup></p>
		<p>G&#xf3;mez, the &#x201C; &#x2019;most visible&#x2019; spokesman for gay rights in the Latin community,&#x201D; ironically became the subject of a media debate that he was unable to spin.<sup><a id="footnote_back97"></a><a href="#footnote97">97</a></sup> His gay rights visibility and activism cost him his job: he was fired for circulating a gay rights petition.<sup><a id="footnote_back98"></a><a href="#footnote98">98</a></sup> He also became the object of attacks. After he held a press conference on March 22, 1977, on a local Spanish-language television station (Channel 23) to discuss the Human Rights Ordinance, his car was firebombed and completely destroyed.<sup><a id="footnote_back99"></a><a href="#footnote99">99</a></sup> In April, G&#xf3;mez reported to police that he had been attacked in the hotel where he lived and had told friends that he was being followed.<sup><a id="footnote_back100"></a><a href="#footnote100">100</a></sup> In early May, G&#xf3;mez was found unresponsive in his room. G&#xf3;mez subsequently died, but the circumstances of his death remained mysterious. Members of the coalition described the incident as a fatal beating and called for an impartial investigation. Miami Beach police and the consulting medical examiner, however, found that G&#xf3;mez&#x2019;s injuries were a result of convulsions caused by an overdose of barbiturates and tranquilizers.<sup><a id="footnote_back101"></a><a href="#footnote101">101</a></sup> G&#xf3;mez, spokes person for LHR and media whiz, was reduced to being described unceremoniously by the leading local newspaper as &#x201C;Gomez, unemployed, lived in a second-floor room at the Collins Hotel.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back102"></a><a href="#footnote102">102</a></sup> By the end of the campaign, G&#xf3;mez himself had become a symbol of the sensationalistic tactics it generated. When then <span class="italic">Herald </span>columnist Carl Hiaasen made reference to the incident in a summary article published on the eve of the election, G&#xf3;mez&#x2019;s name, the name of the organization, and his ethnicity/nationality appeared nowhere in the story. Instead, Hiaasen used the story as an example of the gay coalition&#x2019;s media tactics, noting that &#x201C;gay rights activists grimly told a network television audience that a fellow homosexual was &#x2018;savagely&#x2019; beaten into a coma by anti-gay vigilantes when, according to the police and hospital reports, the victim took an overdose of drugs and fell down.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back103"></a><a href="#footnote103">103</a></sup></p>
		<p>Such negative attention, if short-lived, during the campaign, however, did compel the coalition to recognize gay Latinos. Discussing Ramos&#x2019;s suicide and the firebombing of G&#xf3;mez&#x2019;s car, Monteagudo wrote that although the &#x201C;Gay Coalition [was] giving us only halfhearted support . . . with the Latinos getting the headlines, the Coalition could no longer treat us as poor relations.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back104"></a><a href="#footnote104">104</a></sup> Therefore, although LHR initially faced a tepid reception from the mainstream gay group, the coalition did eventually agree to Latino representation within the organization.</p>
		<p>This representation came with a price&#x2014;an agreement to stop lobbying in Latino communities. Among the coalition, there was disagreement about this strategy. A founding member and an original backer of the antidiscrimination amendment, Basker argued that African Americans and Latinos should be lobbied. By this time, however, Basker had been demoted by Geto and held only a token position within the coalition&#x2019;s hierarchy. Geto and Campbell did not agree with Basker. Geto was so convinced that Cubans opposed gay rights that on the day of the election he was quoted in the <span class="italic">Miami Herald </span>predicting, &#x201C;a majority of Cubans will be against us.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back105"></a><a href="#footnote105">105</a></sup> In exchange for its agreement to cease lobbying Cuban Americans, the coalition offered LHR a seat on the executive committee for Muni and agreed to include Monteagudo in strategy meetings.<sup><a id="footnote_back106"></a><a href="#footnote106">106</a></sup> Monteagudo explained the logic behind this decision to Sears:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>All these politicos, like Ethan Getto, decided that they would write off the Latin community because it was too conservative. &#x201C;They are going to vote against us anyway, so we better let sleeping dogs lie.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>Getto suggested that we would do a good service to the cause by <span class="italic">not </span>holding meetings or getting volunteers to work with the Coalition. . . . Of course, while we ignored the Latin community, the other side was encouraging Latins to come out and vote&#x2014;and they did! While most Latinos would have voted against us in any case, we wouldn&#x2019;t have cost the Coalition any votes had we been in there fighting. We might have gotten more people to come out.<sup><a id="footnote_back107"></a><a href="#footnote107">107</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Barry Adam confirms that the gay rights coalition did not make an effort to win the Cuban vote. They &#x201C;eschew[ed] door-to-door canvassing and ignor[ed] Miami&#x2019;s large Cuban and black communities.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back108"></a><a href="#footnote108">108</a></sup> Edmund White&#x2019;s conversations with Miami gays also corroborate this stance:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>One Cuban who worked for the gay coalition told me that he felt gay leaders had made a mistake to ignore the Spanish-speaking population. &#x201C;Out of state consultants from New York and San Francisco had decided in advance that Cubans don&#x2019;t vote and are best forgotten. . . . We were not permitted to phone people with Spanish surnames. The result was that gays lost 93 percent of the Cuban vote.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back109"></a><a href="#footnote109">109</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>In a letter to Roth written during the campaign, Monteagudo also expressed his apprehension about this arrangement, but explained LHR&#x2019;s inability to challenge the decision.</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>They are treating us lightly&#x2014;either ignoring us or taking us for granted (Blacks and Lesbians are accorded the same treatment). In my opinion there is discrimination involved, although they deny it. They mention the fact that our group is listed on their new letterhead, as if symbolic courtesies could take the place of more substantial concessions. Then last night (at our weekly meeting) we met with our Campaign Director, Ethan Gaeto . . . who told us that, considering the Homophobia prevalent in the Latin Community, the Coalition would not campaign there, fearing a reaction. Not wishing to show disunity, and having no money, we agreed.<sup><a id="footnote_back110"></a><a href="#footnote110">110</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Muni and Monteagudo continued to work with the coalition, but LHR&#x2019;s &#x201C;activities [were] restricted to the Latin gay population, running rap sessions, offering services, and sponsoring a group trip.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back111"></a><a href="#footnote111">111</a></sup> These low-visibility activities were designed so as not to provoke heterosexual Cuban Americans who were assumed to be irrevocably homophobic.</p>
		
		<h3>The Anita Effect</h3>
		<p>By the end of June 1977, Bryant and SOC had successfully won repeal of the referendum, while local gay rights activists had suffered a staggering loss. However, the loss of this battle was not the end of the gay rights struggle. Rather, it marked the beginning of a new phase that led to increased visibility and politicization of gay men and lesbians around the country. Tina Fetner has argued that the Save Our Children campaign had some positive effects on national gay social movements: namely, increasing national visibility of gay rights issues, providing a concrete example of discrimination faced by gay people (in terms of SOC&#x2019;s homophobic rhetoric), and &#x201C;personify[ing] the homophobic sentiment of the nation.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back112"></a><a href="#footnote112">112</a></sup> This assessment reflected feelings in South Florida. During the campaign, local gay rights activists had insisted that &#x201C;Anita Bryant was the best thing that ever happened to the gay rights movement.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back113"></a><a href="#footnote113">113</a></sup> One coalition participant agreed that &#x201C;it was a loss that did us a lot of good. . . . We got united, and since then we&#x2019;ve advanced a lot.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back114"></a><a href="#footnote114">114</a></sup></p>
		<p>Despite these unintended positive effects, on a local level the Bryant campaign painfully revealed the vulnerability of gay Latinos in South Florida. By June, LHR had disbanded, as members left the area or joined other local groups. By March 1978, a discouraged Monteagudo pronounced that &#x201C;Latins for Human Rights are, to all intents and purposes, dead and buried. Cuban-American Gays and Lesbians are paralyzed by apathy, by fear, and by the right-wing reactionary thinking that permeates Cuban-American culture.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back115"></a><a href="#footnote115">115</a></sup></p>
		<p>In the end, Monteagudo&#x2019;s pessimistic assessment reinforced conventional wisdom about Cuban Americans, the assumption that Cuban American culture is homogeneously homophobic and socially conservative. The account presented here, however, illustrates the varied ways in which this homophobia was contested by Cuban American gays and lesbians, including by Monteagudo himself. Cuban Americans and Latinos may have been voting and demonstrating in support of Bryant, but they were also organizing in support of gay rights and suffering the consequences of those brave actions. The story of Latino participation in the 1977 campaign indicates the double bind faced by Latinos who actively chose to identify as gay. Gay Latino activists not only endured a range of abuse from verbal attacks to physical attacks: they also weathered a tepid response from their gay and lesbian brothers and sisters in the coalition. As second-class coalition members, they were treated as tokens and denied a voice in strategic planning even when it came to issues of special importance to them like the decision to campaign in predominantly Cuban neighborhoods.</p>
		<p>If it is true that Bryant and Save Our Children owed their success to Cuban American support, it is also true that there was a flourishing Cuban gay scene in South Florida. Even allowing for hyperbole, Monteagudo&#x2019;s comment that Little Havana had the highest drag-queen-per-square-foot ratio suggests that gender transgressions were a visible part of everyday life in the emerging Cuban American enclave. While many&#x2014;including Monteagudo himself&#x2014;did not understand this visibility as political, I argue in the pages that follow that those who participated in everyday gender-transgressive practices were engaging in their own kind of politics.</p>
	
	  <h3>Gay Visibility: A Transnational Analysis</h3>
		<p>During the 1960s and 1970s, in Cuba and the United States, gay male visibility was at the center of debates about sexual politics. These debates were not just about gender and sexuality but also about community and national identity. While homophobic campaigns against visible gayness were mounted in defense of both the Cuban Revolution and ostensibly threatened U.S. children, homosexual men also engaged in politics of visibility. In Cuba, in defiance of harsh policing and explicit discrimination, <span class="italic">locas </span>continued to wear their hair a bit too long, risk imprisonment for choosing a too-brightly colored shirt, and test the waters by slipping into gay vernacular with a stranger. In the United States, Latino gays and lesbians who participated in more formal politics achieved another kind of visibility, one based on being out and struggling for group rights in the formal political sphere.</p>
		<p>These emerging activists were marginalized both by mainstream Cuban Americans and by predominantly Anglo gay activists. Like their Cuban <span class="italic">loca </span>counterparts, Cuban American queens also staked out their territory in Cuban American neighborhoods and participated in emerging gay scenes in and outside the enclave.</p>
		<p>In 1980, these visibility politics collided, as homosexual men who had lived through the severest period of Cuban antigay enforcement migrated en masse to South Florida. Precisely because gender transgressions had been the object of state surveillance and control, some gay Cubans departed their homeland in search of freedom and a place to be visibly gay without political repercussions. Unknown to many of these homosexual migrants, they were entering a community that only a few years prior had witnessed a media frenzy over gay rights that culminated in a major political defeat and political backlash against gay visibility. The South Florida gay rights struggle had several consequences. Some have argued that the defeat encouraged many in the gay community to come out in order to challenge bigotry and repression. However, the blow of the defeat was swift and powerful for Latins for Human Rights, the budding Latino gay group of political activists. As the potential organizational basis for Latino gay politics disintegrated, the association between Cuban Americans and conservative homophobia was further reinforced&#x2014;an association that many heterosexual Cuban Americans were proud to embrace.</p>
		
		<hr /><ol class="footnotes"><li id="footnote1"><p>Homophobic attitudes and state practices clearly existed in Cuba prior to the 1959 revolution. However, a significant qualitative change occurred after 1959. Ian Lumsden argues that after the revolution, the repression of homosexuals became more systematic and institutionalized; the revolutionary state more efficiently policed private behavior; and homosexuals increasingly were persecuted as a group (<span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>57&#x2013;75). Homosexuality in Cuba has been the subject of extensive scholarship; see, for example, Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part 1&#x201D;; Henk van den Boogaard and Kathelijne van Kammen, &#x201C;We Cannot Jump over Our Own Shadow,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Coming Out: An Anthology of Gay and Lesbian Writings, </span>ed. Stephen Likosky (New York: Pantheon, 1992), 82&#x2013;101; Marvin Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba: Machismo, Homosexuality, and AIDS </span>(Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1994); Allen Young, <span class="italic">Gays under the Cuban Revolution </span>(San Francisco: Grey Fox, 1981). Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich articulate a &#x201C;countercritique of Cuban homosexuality&#x201D; that challenges what they see as the &#x201C;continual scapegoating of Cuban revolutionary homophobia&#x201D; (&#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part 1,&#x201D; 455, 42). For a discussion of Cuban sexuality in the 1800s, see Abel Sierra Madero, <span class="italic">La naci&#xf3;n sexuada: Relaciones de g&#xE9;nero y sexo en Cuba (1830&#x2013;1855) </span>(Havana: Editorial de Ciencias Sociales, 2002). For literary/cultural analyses of Cuban sexuality, see V&#xED;ctor Fowler, <span class="italic">La maldici&#xf3;n: Una historia del placer como conquista </span>(Havana: Editorial Letras Cubanas, 1998); Fowler, <span class="italic">Historias del cuerpo </span>(Havana: Editorial Letras Cubanas, 2001); Jos&#xE9; Quiroga, &#x201C;Homosexualities in the Tropic of Revolution,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Sex and Sexuality in Latin America, </span>ed. Daniel Balderston and Donna J. Guy (New York: New York University Press, 1997); Quiroga, <span class="italic">Tropics of Desire: Interventions from Queer Latino America </span>(New York: New York University Press, 2000); Quiroga, &#x201C;Boleros, Divas, and Identity Models,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Cuba, the Elusive Nation: Interpretations of National Identity, </span>ed. Dami&#225;n J. Fern&#225;ndez and Madeline C&#225;mara Betancourt (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2000); Emilio Bejel, <span class="italic">Gay Cuban Nation </span>(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001). For recent ethnographic work on male sexuality in Cuba, see Jafari Sinclaire Allen, &#x201C;Means of Desire&#x2019;s Production: Male Sex Labor in Cuba,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power </span>14 (2007): 183&#x2013;202; Allen, <span class="italic">Venceremos? The Erotics of Black Self-Making in Cuba </span>(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2011).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back1">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote2"><p>Castro, quoted in Lee Lockwood, <span class="italic">Castro&#x2019;s Cuba, Cuba&#x2019;s Fidel </span>(New York: Vintage, 1969), 207.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back2">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote3"><p>Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part 1,&#x201D; 448. This chapter highlights the historical conditions experienced by gay men who arrived during Mariel; thus, it focuses on the relationship between the Cuban state and homosexuality up to 1980. However, Castro later softened his official stance on homosexuality; subsequently, the degree of systematized persecution of homosexuals diminished in Cuba. There is debate as to when and to what extent conditions for homosexuals improved. Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich, who have a relatively positive view of the Castro regime, argue that life for Cuban homosexual men and lesbians began to improve as early as the 1970s. Leiner states that &#x201C;life for gay people had improved considerably in the mid to late 1980s&#x201D; and that discrimination during that decade came from &#x201C;individual prejudices not official policies.&#x201D; Lumsden defines 1965&#x2013;75 as the &#x201C;worst period of homosexual oppression&#x201D;; agrees that since the 1970s homosexual persecution became less systematic and institutionalized; and argues that &#x201C;there is little evidence to support the contention that the persecution of homosexuals remains a matter of state policy.&#x201D; However, he calls Debra Evenson&#x2019;s 1994 assertion that &#x201C;homosexuals are no longer subject to official harassment for simply being identified as homosexual&#x201D; a travesty. See Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part 1,&#x201D; 449; Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>49, 51; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>80, 86, 91; Debra Evenson, <span class="italic">Revolution in the Balance: Law and Society in Contemporary Cuba </span>(Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1994), 159.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back3">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote4"><p>Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>57.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back4">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote5"><p>Ernesto Che Guevara, &#x201C;Socialism and Man in Cuba,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Che Guevara and the Cuban Revolution, </span>ed. David Deutschmann (Sydney, Aus.: Pathfinder, 1987), 246&#x2013;61. I do not want to give the impression that the revolution solely focused on male issues. On the contrary, it did much to improve the place of women in Cuban society. However, the discourse of the revolution, especially during this early period, was highly masculinized. For more on women and the Cuban Revolution, see Julie D. Shayne, <span class="italic">The Revolution Question: Feminisms in El Salvador, Chile, and Cuba </span>(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2004); Lois M. Smith and Alfred Padula, <span class="italic">Sex and Revolution: Women in Socialist Cuba </span>(New York: Oxford University Press, 1996); Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba.</span></p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back5">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote6"><p>Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>26&#x2013;27; Guevara, &#x201C;Socialism and Man in Cuba,&#x201D; 246&#x2013;61; Luis Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba </span>(New York: Praeger, 1979), 165&#x2013;67.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back6">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote7"><p>Samue Feij&#xf3;o, &#x201C;Revoluci&#xf3;n y vicios,&#x201D; <span class="italic">El Mundo, </span>April 15, 1965. Original: &#x201C;Este grave vicio es uno de los m&#225;s nefandos y funestos legados del capitalismo. . . . Contra &#xE9;l se lucha y se luchar&#225; hasta erradicarlo de un pa&#xED;s viril, envuelto en una batalla de vida o muerte contra el imperialismo yanqui. Y que este pa&#xED;s viril&#xED;simo, con ej&#xE9;rcito de hombres, no debe ni puede ser expresado por escritores y &#x2018;artistas&#x2019; homosexuales o seudohomosexuales. Porque ning&#xfa;n homosexual representa la Revoluci&#xf3;n, que es asunto de varones, de pu&#xf1;o y no de plumas, de coraje y no de temblequeras, de entereza y no de intrigas, de valor creador y no de sorpresas merengosas.&#x201D; Various scholars cite this passage. See, for instance, Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>25; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>53&#x2013;54; Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>166.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back7">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote8"><p>Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>30&#x2013;31; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>65&#x2013;70; Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>158.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back8">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote9"><p>Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>158. According to Young, when these camps were closed, the government stated that they &#x201C;did not object to the philosophy behind the camps; they merely disagreed with the way the orders were being interpreted&#x201D; (<span class="italic">Gays under the Cuban Revolution, </span>27).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back9">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote10"><p>The closure of the UMAPs was announced in 1967; however, they were not finally phased out until 1968 (Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>70) or 1969 (Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>31). In a letter published in the United States, Cuban homosexuals assert that in 1970 even after the UMAPs were closed, there were still other &#x201C;prison farms exclusively for homosexuals&#x201D; (&#x201C;Letter from Cuban Gay People to the North American Gay Liberation Movement,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">We Are Everywhere: A Historical Sourcebook of Gay and Lesbian Politics, </span>ed. Mark Blasius and Shane Phelan [New York: Routledge, 1997], 407).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back10">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote11"><p>According to Young, homosexuals were excluded from the Communist Party and the Youth Communist Party; arguably then, this exclusion translated into &#x201C;second- class citizenship of Cuban homosexuals.&#x201D; Both Leiner and Lumsden suggest that homosexuals were not explicitly prohibited from the Communist Party, but in practice homosexuals were denied membership or dismissed if their homosexuality became known. Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich imply that the targeting of homosexual gathering places by the Cuban state&#x2014;especially after the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961&#x2014;was justified because in some cases the state was correct to assume that these gathering areas were &#x201C;centers of counterrevolutionary activities&#x201D; (Young, <span class="italic">Gays under the Cuban Revolution, </span>28; Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>36&#x2013;37; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>93; Arg&#xFC;elles and Rich, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part 1,&#x201D; 447).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back11">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote12"><p>Names of interviewees have been changed unless noted otherwise.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back12">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote13"><p>For example, laws against corruption of minors in the 1936 code did not specify homosexuality. However, the first article in the corruption of minors section of the 1979 code specifically sanctions anyone who &#x201C;induces a minor, 16 years old or younger, of either sex, to engage in homosexuality, or go to places where vice or acts of corruption are practiced&#x201D; (C&#xf3;digo de Defensa Social, 17 de abril de 1936 [1938], Jesus Montero [ed.], Obispo, 127, La Habana, Cuba, Art. 486&#x2013;488, 154; C&#xf3;digo Penal, Ley No. 21 de 15 de febrero de 1979, Gaceta Oficial de 1ro. de marzo de 1979. La Habana, Cuba: Ministerio de Justicia, Art. 359, 193).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back13">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote14"><p>Original: &#x201C;&#x2014;Se sanciona con privaci&#xf3;n de libertad de tres a nueve meses o multa hasta doscientas setenta cuotas o ambas al que: a) haga p&#xfa;blica ostentaci&#xf3;n de su condici&#xf3;n de homosexual o importune o solicite con sus requerimientos a otro.&#x201D; The 1936 penal code also included laws against public scandal (Article 490) for those who &#x201C;habitually dedicated themselves to active or passive pederasty or publicly displayed this vice, or importuned or solicited another for [homosexual] purposes&#x201D; (&#x201C;con grave esc&#225;ndalo se dedique habitualmente a la pederastia, activa o pasiva, o haga p&#xfa;blica ostentaci&#xf3;n de ese vicio, o importune o solicite con su requerimiento a otro&#x201D;). When revised in 1979, the sentence was also increased from a maximum of six months to a maximum of nine months. The maximum fine was increased from 180 cuotas to 270 cuotas (C&#xf3;digo de Defensa Social, 17 de Abril de 1936 [1938], Art. 490, 155; C&#xf3;digo Penal, Ley No. 21 de 15 de febrero de 1979, Art. 359, 193).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back14">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote15"><p>C&#xf3;digo Penal, Ley No. 21 de 15 de febrero de 1979, Art. 359, 193.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back15">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote16"><p>Articles 76 and 77, as cited by Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>153. The drafters of the 1936 code were indebted to the positivist criminologist Enrique Ferri for the concept of dangerousness and precriminality. For more on how lawmakers used Ferri, see Jos&#xE9; Agust&#xED;n Mart&#xED;nez, &#x201C;Relaci&#xf3;n sobre el proyecto preliminar del libro primero del c&#xf3;digo de defensa social,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">C&#xf3;digo de defensa social, </span>ed. Jes&#xfa;s Montero (Havana, Cuba: Biblioteca jur&#xED;dica de autores cubanos y extranjeros, 1936).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back16">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote17"><p>Translation by Evenson, <span class="italic">Revolution in the Balance, </span>157. Original: &#x201C;Se considera estado peligroso la especial proclividad en que se halla una persona para cometer delitos, demostrada por la conducta que observa en contradicci&#xf3;n manifesta con las normas de la moral socialista&#x201D; (C&#xf3;digo Penal, Ley No. 21 de 15 de febrero de 1979, Art. 76, 60).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back17">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote18"><p>Evenson, <span class="italic">Revolution in the Balance, </span>156&#x2013;57. Evenson emphasizes that homosexuality was never mentioned in the articles relating to social dangerousness (see 159).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back18">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote19"><p>Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>83.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back19">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote20"><p>For example, see Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>43; van den Boogaard and van Kammen, &#x201C;We Cannot Jump over Our Own Shadow,&#x201D; 92; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays, </span>83; Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>153&#x2013;54.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back20">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote21"><p>Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>155.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back21">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote22"><p>For examples of visible markers associated with homosexuality used by the state, see Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>31&#x2013;32; Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>155.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back22">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote23"><p>Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>31.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back23">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote24"><p>For an English- language translation, see &#x201C;Declaration by the First National Congress on Education and Culture,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Out of the Closets: Voices of Gay Liberation, </span>ed. Allen Young and Karla Jay (New York: Douglas Book, 1972), 246&#x2013;47.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back24">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote25"><p>Homosexuals were also banned from medical professions (because close physical contact was possible) as well as army jobs and sensitive government jobs (because they were deemed untrustworthy). See, for instance, Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba, </span>37, 46; Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>158, 60.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back25">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote26"><p>For an English- language translation, see &#x201C;Declaration by the First National Congress on Education and Culture,&#x201D; 246&#x2013;47.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back26">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote27"><p>Feij&#xf3;o argues, &#x201C;This is not about persecuting homosexuals, but rather about destroying their positions, the way they behave, their influence. . . . We will have to eradicate them from their key positions in the spheres of revolutionary art and literature. This is called revolutionary social hygiene&#x201D; (&#x201C;Revoluci&#xf3;n y vicios,&#x201D; 5).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back27">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote28"><p>Feij&#xf3;o, &#x201C;Revoluci&#xf3;n y vicios,&#x201D; 5.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back28">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote29"><p>Ley no. 1267, Gaceta Oficial de Cuba, 12 de marzo del 1974, 117&#x2013;18, as cited and translated by Salas, <span class="italic">Social Control and Deviance in Cuba, </span>160. These labor restrictions were formally eliminated in 1978.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back29">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote30"><p>Paul Julian Smith has referred to the enforcement of these laws as a &#x201C;trial of visibility&#x201D; in which men were arrested for appearing homosexual (&#x201C;Cuban Homo sexualities: On the Beach with N&#xE9;stor Almendros and Reinaldo Arenas,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Hispanisms and Homosexualities, </span>ed. Silvia Molloy and Robert McKee Irwin [Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1998], 256).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back30">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote31"><p>Carlos Alberto Montaner, <span class="italic">Informe secreto sobre la revoluci&#xf3;n cubana </span>(Madrid: Ediciones Sedmay, 1976), 176.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back31">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote32"><p>For another Latin American case that clarifies the dynamic relationship between visibility, same- sex sexual practice, and gender transgression, see Carlos Monsiv&#225;is, &#x201C;The 41 and the <span class="italic">Gran Redada,</span>&#x201D; in <span class="italic">The Famous 41: Sexuality and Social Control in Mexico, 1901, </span>ed. Robert McKee Irwin, Edward J. McCaughan, and Michelle Roc&#xED;o Nasser (New York: Palgrave, 2003), 139&#x2013;67.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back32">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote33"><p>Quiroga, &#x201C;Homosexualities in the Tropic of Revolution,&#x201D; 134&#x2013;36.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back33">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote34"><p>Reinaldo Arenas, <span class="italic">Before Night Falls, </span>trans. Dolores M. Koch (New York: Viking, 1993), 105&#x2013;7.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back34">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote35"><p>I focus on the treatment of homosexuals in Cuba prior to 1980, but there have been dramatic changes in relation to homosexuality and transgender issues in Cuba in recent years. In 2010 Fidel Castro apologized for the persecution of homosexuals in Cuba since 1959 and recognized that this was &#x201C;una gran injusticia&#x201D; (a great injustice). Ra&#xfa;l Castro, who was the butt of so many homophobic jokes and innuendos, is now Cuba&#x2019;s formal leader after his brother Fidel stepped down. Ra&#xfa;l Castro&#x2019;s daughter, Mariela Castro Esp&#xED;n, has become an outspoken advocate for homosexual and transgender rights (or &#x201C;sexual diversity&#x201D;) in her role as director of the Centro Nacional de Educaci&#xf3;n Sexual (National Center for Sexual Education) known as CENESEX. Since 2008 Cuba has held a series of officially sanctioned gay pride parades with the leadership of Mariela Castro. How this emerging respect for homosexual and transgender rights will extend to sexual minorities who do not work through officially sanctioned organizations and channels remains to be seen. It is unclear, for example, if the independent group Observatorio Cubano de los Derechos LGBT was able to hold the Paseo LGBT por el Prado habanero (An LGBT Walk through Havana&#x2019;s El Prado) on June 28, 2011.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back35">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote36"><p>B&#xE9;rub&#xE9;, <span class="italic">Coming Out under Fire</span>; D&#x2019;Emilio, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities</span>; Barry D. Adam, <span class="italic">The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, </span>rev. ed. (New York: Twayne, 1995).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back36">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote37"><p>John D&#x2019;Emilio, &#x201C;Cycles of Change, Questions of Strategy: The Gay and Lesbian Movement after Fifty Years,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">The Politics of Gay Rights, </span>ed. Craig A. Rimmerman, Kenneth D. Wald, and Clyde Wilcox (Chicago: University of Chicago, 2000), 33.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back37">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote38"><p>Denis Altman, <span class="italic">The Homosexualization of America </span>(Boston: Beacon, 1982), 128.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back38">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote39"><p>D&#x2019;Emilio, &#x201C;Cycles of Change, Questions of Strategy,&#x201D; 35.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back39">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote40"><p>According to James T. Sears, thirty- seven cities, including Chapel Hill and Austin, had adopted some kind of gay rights ordinance (<span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones: Queering Space in the Stonewall South </span>[New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2001], 230). Of the twenty- eight cities and counties that adopted gay rights ordinances analyzed by James W. Button, Barbara A. Rienzo, and Kenneth D. Wald, half could be considered college communities. Other cities included Detroit, Minneapolis, San Francisco, Seattle, and Washington (<span class="italic">Private Lives, Public Conflicts: Battles over Gay Rights in American Communities </span>[Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press, 1997], 64).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back40">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote41"><p>Local laws used to justify bar raids were challenged by those arrested at the Coral Way Bachelor II Lounge on November 6, 1971. Among the six arrested was Enrique Vela. The judge threw out the charges, and the city later repealed the ordinance. The newly formed Gay Activist Alliance&#x2013;Miami challenged the Miami Beach ordinances against cross- dressing, taking up the battle after the failed attempts of the early gay activist Richard Inman. The presiding judge struck down the ordinances in 1972. The Florida Supreme Court struck down the state- level &#x201C;crimes against nature&#x201D; law in 1971 (Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>125&#x2013;26). Interestingly, Inman also had a Cuba connection. He traveled to Cuba, owned a hotel that catered to Cuban clientele, and reportedly aided the FBI in surveillance of pro- Castro groups posing as anti- Castro groups (Sears, <span class="italic">Lonely Hunters: An Oral History of Lesbian and Gay Southern Life, 1948&#x2013;1968 </span>[Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1997], 255&#x2013;56).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back41">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote42"><p>Dade County includes the city of Miami and what is known as the Greater Miami area. In 1997 Dade County was officially renamed Miami&#x2013;Dade County.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back42">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote43"><p>The full language of the amended ordinance reads: &#x201C;Ordinance prohibiting discrimination in the areas of housing, public accommodations, and employment against persons based on race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, physically handicapped, marital status, place of birth, and affectional and sexual preference.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back43">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote44"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>237.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back44">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote45"><p>Bryant was SOC president, Green was secretary, and Brake was treasurer (Bryant, <span class="italic">The Anita Bryant Story </span>[Old Tappan, N.J.: Fleming H. Revell, 1977]). Brake is considered the &#x201C;architect of the repeal language&#x201D; (Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Ruby-fruit, and Rhinestones, </span>237).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back45">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote46"><p>Save Our Children Inc., advertisement, <span class="italic">&#x201C;A Mother&#x2019;s Day Wish,&#x201D; Miami Herald, </span>May 8, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back46">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote47"><p>Bryant, <span class="italic">Anita Bryant Story, </span>146. The SOC campaign was quite successful in focusing the media message on the ordinance as a threat to children, for interviews at polling centers suggests that many who voted for repeal were motivated precisely by this message.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back47">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote48"><p>Altman, <span class="italic">Homosexualization of America, </span>128.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back48">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote49"><p>Frank Greve and Gerald Storch, &#x201C;Anita Bryant: Homosexuality Is a Sin,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>May 29, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back49">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote50"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back50">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote51"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>231; &#x201C;History of the Dade County Coalition,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Sunshine </span>1, no. 1 (1977): 2. In addition to Campbell and Basker, Keith Davis, Marty Rubin, Lisa Berry (assistant pastor of Metropolitan Community Church), Jay Freier, Alan Rockway, Barbara Bull (Lesbian Task Force), Bob Kunst, Bob Stickney (owner of Candelight Club and Warehouse VIII), and Alexias Ram&#xf3;n Muni were in attendance.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back51">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote52"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>231&#x2013;32.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back52">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote53"><p>Carl Hiaasen, &#x201C;Out of the Closet and Then Some,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>Tropic Magazine, June 5, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back53">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote54"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>237&#x2013;38.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back54">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote55"><p>Ibid., 238. See also 237&#x2013;42.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back55">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote56"><p>Adam, <span class="italic">Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, </span>111. In addition to Geto, Jim Foster, Michelle deMilly, and Mike Scott joined the Coalition (&#x201C;Team of Professionals to Co- ordinate Campaign,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Sunshine </span>1, no. 1 [1977]: 1).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back56">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote57"><p>See, for example, &#x201C;An Unneeded Ordinance,&#x201D; editorial, <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 5, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back57">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote58"><p>See Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>242.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back58">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote59"><p>Ibid., 232.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back59">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote60"><p>The issue that prompted Kunst&#x2019;s departure was whether the local coalition should participate in a national boycott of Florida orange juice, since Bryant was the official spokesperson for the Florida Citrus Commission. Gay activists in other parts of the country had called for the boycott to protest Bryant&#x2019;s hateful rhetoric. While other coalition members felt the boycott was a good strategy for homosexuals and supporters outside South Florida, they did not believe they should start a local boycott (Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>236).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back60">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote61"><p>Bob St. Aubin, Media Committee, Dade County Coalition for Human Rights formerly Dade County Coalition for Humanistic Rights of Gays, to Dear Friend, n.d., Harry Langhorne Papers 7304, box 3, folder 21, Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University Library, Ithaca, New York.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back61">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote62"><p>Hiaasen, &#x201C;Out of the Closet and Then Some,&#x201D; 12; Adam, <span class="italic">Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, </span>111.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back62">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote63"><p>Although <span class="italic">Latinos pro Derechos Humanos </span>was described as a &#x201C;small band of gay Cuban activists,&#x201D; the choice of a pan- ethnic name suggests a conscious desire and/or need to work with other national origin groups (Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Ruby-fruit, and Rhinestones, </span>240). Both the Spanish- and English- language names of the organization were used during the campaign. The Spanish term <span class="italic">Latinos </span>was translated as &#x201C;Latins,&#x201D; reflecting the local common usage.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back63">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote64"><p>Bryant, <span class="italic">Anita Bryant Story, </span>125.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back64">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote65"><p>Ibid.; Theodore Stanger, &#x201C;Gay- Rights Law Is Crushed: Margin of Victory Greater Than 2&#x2013;1,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 8, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back65">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote66"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>236. See also Perry Deane Young, <span class="italic">God&#x2019;s Bullies </span>(New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1982), 53; Helga Silva, &#x201C;Bryant Urges Latin Turnout on Gay Rights,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami News, </span>June 4, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back66">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote67"><p>Duberman, &#x201C;The Anita Bryant Brigade,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Left Out: The Politics of Exclusion/Essays 1964&#x2013;1999 </span>(New York: Basic Books, 1999), 321.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back67">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote68"><p>Vanderbilt Compilation of Off- Air Recording, WC06880, Florida Moving Image Archive, Miami.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back68">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote69"><p>Bryant, <span class="italic">Anita Bryant Story, </span>152, 71.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back69">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote70"><p>Rich and Arg&#xFC;elles, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part II,&#x201D; 125&#x2013;26.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back70">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote71"><p>A public opinion survey was commissioned and paid for by the Advocate Research and Education Foundation under the leadership of David Goodstein in order to &#x201C;determine why they voted the way they did.&#x201D; Had this survey been completed, we might have more information on the degree to which Cuban American voters participated in the election and how they voted. Unfortunately, the survey was never conducted in Dade County. Instead, these resources were used to evaluate a similar upcoming vote in St. Paul, Minnesota (David Goodstein, Memorandum on Organization of Advocate Research and Education Fund to Board of AREF, 17 April 1978, Advocate Research and Education Papers 7310, box 5, folder 17, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University; Hugh Schwartz, Memorandum on Study&#x2014;Dade County to David Goodstein, 27 April 1978, Advocate Research and Education Papers 7310, box 8, folder 54, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University; Advocate Research and Education Fund, &#x201C;Report on the St. Paul Opinion Survey: Public Attitudes Toward Homosexuality,&#x201D; Advocate Research and Education Papers 7310, box 5, folder 16, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back71">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote72"><p>Stanger, &#x201C;Gay- Rights Law Is Crushed.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back72">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote73"><p>&#x201C;8 Precincts&#x2014;and How They Voted,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 8, 1977. In addition to Little Havana (precinct number 657), the following precincts also voted for repeal: Hialeah (110) by 70.6 percent, Liberty City (450) by 55 percent, Kendall (569) by 68.1 percent, Key Biscayne (817) by 76.2 percent. The following precincts voted against repeal: North Miami Beach (37) by 66.6 percent, Miami Beach (646) by 52.8 percent, and Coconut Grove (832) by 62.6 percent. In Dade County overall, 69.3 percent of voters voted for repeal and 30.6 percent voted against repeal.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back73">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote74"><p>Juanita Greene, &#x201C;Inside Look at Gay Vote,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 10, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back74">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote75"><p>Rich and Arg&#xFC;elles, &#x201C;Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution, Part II,&#x201D; 125&#x2013;28.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back75">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote76"><p>&#x201C;8 Precincts&#x2014;and How They Voted.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back76">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote77"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back77">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote78"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>127.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back78">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote79"><p>Ibid., 156.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back79">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote80"><p>Ibid., 127.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back80">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote81"><p>Ibid., 304.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back81">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote82"><p>Ibid., 159.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back82">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote83"><p>Ibid., 285.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back83">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote84"><p>After becoming a U.S. citizen, Ram&#xf3;n Muni changed his name to Alexias Ram&#xf3;n Muni in tribute to the hero in <span class="italic">The Last of the Wine </span>by Mary Renault (London: Longman, Green 1956). Because he was hesitant about using his real name, during the 1977 campaign he used a pseudonym, Ram&#xf3;n Ruiz (Jesse Monteagudo, e- mail to author, July 4, 2006).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back84">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote85"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>230. According to Sears, Muni had been a participant in Stonewall, was an active member of the Gay Liberation Front and the Gay Activist Alliance in New York City, and cofounder of Gay Community Services of South Florida.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back85">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote86"><p>Ibid., 240; Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, November 18, 1977, Robert Roth Papers 7325, box 3, folder 29, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University (hereafter cited as RRP). Although the group included gays and lesbians, the great majority of members identified in various accounts I found were men.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back86">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote87"><p>Robert Roth to Stephen J. Jerome, Esq., April 29, 1977, RRP.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back87">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote88"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>240; <span class="italic">Estudio Uno, </span>WQBA, March 14, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back88">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote89"><p>Young, <span class="italic">God&#x2019;s Bullies, </span>53.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back89">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote90"><p>Jesse Monteagudo, as quoted in Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>240.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back90">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote91"><p>Young, <span class="italic">God&#x2019;s Bullies, </span>54.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back91">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote92"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back92">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote93"><p>Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, April 2, 1977, RRP.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back93">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote94"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>240&#x2013;41.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back94">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote95"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back95">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote96"><p>Ibid., 373n76.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back96">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote97"><p>John Katzenbach and David Holmberg, &#x201C;MD Says Gay Leader Took Drug Overdose,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami News, </span>May 6, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back97">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote98"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>372n72.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back98">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote99"><p>Dade County Coalition for the Humanistic Rights of Gays, &#x201C;Latin Gay Activist Car Firebombed,&#x201D; press release, March 22, 1977, Harry Langhorne Papers 7304, box 3, folder 21, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back99">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote100"><p>According to the <span class="italic">Miami News, </span>police claimed that they had no report of the hotel room attack. According to the <span class="italic">Herald, </span>police seemed to acknowledge the previous incident but claimed G&#xf3;mez could not describe his assailants. The two newspapers also disagreed as to whether G&#xf3;mez had a history of depression. The <span class="italic">Herald </span>reported that his manager had said he was depressed. The <span class="italic">News, </span>however, quoted Robert St. Aubin as saying G&#xf3;mez had not been depressed (Edna Buchanan, &#x201C;Pill Overdose Caused Coma of Gays Leader, Cops Say,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>May 6, 1977; Katzenbach and Holmberg, &#x201C;MD Says Gay Leader Took Drug Overdose&#x201D;).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back100">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote101"><p>Katzenbach and Holmberg, &#x201C;MD Says Gay Leader Took Drug Overdose.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back101">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote102"><p>Buchanan, &#x201C;Pill Overdose Caused Coma of Gays Leader.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back102">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote103"><p>Hiaasen, &#x201C;Vote Is Likely to Settle Nothing,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 5, 1977. These incidents must have rattled the LHR&#x2019;s small group as well as the national activists gathering in Dade County for what promised to be a ferocious electoral battle. National gay rights leader James Foster arrived in Miami the day after G&#xf3;mez was found unresponsive. Foster was introduced to the Coalition by way of a press conference announcing the attack and reporting that G&#xf3;mez was unconscious and in critical condition (Handwritten diary, James M. Foster Papers 7439, box 11, folder 46, Human Sexuality Collection, Cornell University).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back103">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote104"><p>Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, April 2, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back104">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote105"><p>Theodore Stanger, &#x201C;Gay- Rights Campaign Is Unorthodox to End,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 7, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back105">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote106"><p>Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, April 2, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back106">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote107"><p>Sears, <span class="italic">Rebels, Rubyfruit, and Rhinestones, </span>241.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back107">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote108"><p>Adam, <span class="italic">Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, </span>111.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back108">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote109"><p>White, <span class="italic">States of Desire: Travels in Gay America </span>(New York: Dutton, 1980), 208.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back109">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote110"><p>Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, April 30, 1977, RRP.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back110">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote111"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back111">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote112"><p>Fetner, &#x201C;Working Anita Bryant: The Impact of Christian Anti- Gay Activism on Lesbian and Gay Movement Claims,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Social Problems </span>48, no. 3 (2001): 425.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back112">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote113"><p>Theodore Stanger, &#x201C;U.S. Watches Dade&#x2019;s Gay Rights Vote,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>June 5, 1977.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back113">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote114"><p>This interviewee, a Cuban American gay man, became disillusioned with gay politics after his participation in the coalition. He goes on to say, &#x201C;Of course, you never know when there&#x2019;s going to be another repression. Repressions always come when people are enjoying many liberties.&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back114">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote115"><p>Jesse Monteagudo to Robert Roth, March 19, 1978, RRP.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back115">back</a></p></li></ol></div></body></html>