<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>6 Families, Disclosure, and Visibility</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
      
      
		<h2>6 FAMILIES, DISCLOSURE, AND VISIBILITY</h2>
		<h4>&#xa0;</h4>
		
		<p>WHEN RUB&#xC9;N WAS TWELVE YEARS OLD, he told his family he liked boys and not girls. He had heard his parents talk about their love of freedom, a freedom they lost in Cuba and had found again in the land of opportunity. They talked about freedom of speech and the freedom to make one&#x2019;s own choices. Thus twelve-year-old Rub&#xE9;n did not censor himself when proclaiming his attraction for the same sex. He explained: &#x201C;When I was twelve, I just told everybody I was gay. I don&#x2019;t even know if I knew &#x2019;gay&#x2019; or &#x2019;homosexual,&#x2019; I just knew what I was.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>Rub&#xE9;n learned an important lesson that day about Cuban exiles&#x2019; love of freedom: his psychiatric treatments began almost immediately after his announcement. He had not yet had a sexual experience, so his parents were incredulous: &#x201C;They were like, &#x2019;How could you know?&#x2019; I don&#x2019;t know. . . . They took it very badly, and they took me to a psychiatrist for three years, once a week, to try and turn me around.&#x201D; Rub&#xE9;n explained his parents&#x2019; reaction as related to their Cuban upbringing: &#x201C;My parents . . . left Cuba when they were twenty-five, twenty-six. Their feelings about gay people, the reason why it&#x2019;s so difficult for them to accept me, is because of their Cuban upbringing. That&#x2019;s affected my life a lot.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>At the time of our interview, Rub&#xE9;n was a twenty-five-year-old college student who worked part-time. He had been born in the United States and had lived in Miami since he was one year old. He told me the story about his parents&#x2019; reaction to his declaration early on in the interview; nevertheless, throughout our conversation, he emphasized how much he valued his current relationship with his parents. Although it had been ten years since his last trip to the psychiatrist, Rub&#xE9;n and his parents did not talk about the fact that he was not &#x201C;cured.&#x201D; In fact, they did not discuss his sexuality at all. He described their stance toward his gayness as &#x201C;silent acceptance.&#x201D; Given their original reaction, his years of &#x201C;treatment,&#x201D; and their silence about the issue, it might be surprising that Rub&#xE9;n still lived with both of his parents. His choice to live at home, however, could be explained by economic necessity, for he was trying to pursue his studies. Nonetheless, he spoke of his family only in the warmest terms. Although Rub&#xE9;n&#x2019;s parents did not completely accept that he was gay and did not know about his boyfriend, the family was &#x201C;close in other ways.&#x201D; They discussed all aspects of his life, except his sexuality. They ate meals together, &#x201C;hung out,&#x201D; and provided him with a sense of security.</p>
		<p>This chapter focuses on the complicated dynamics between Cuban American gay men and their families of origin. Compared with my other respondents, Rub&#xE9;n told a story both unusual and typical. His parents&#x2019; harsh medicalized response to his declaration was unusual but, unfortunately, not unique in my sample. His explicit, verbal declaration of his sexuality was not the most common strategy employed by the men I interviewed. Nonetheless, Rub&#xE9;n did have much in common with the majority of my respondents. Like Rub&#xE9;n, most respondents discussed how they valued their relationships with families of origin and the ways their lives were concretely structured with family needs in mind. One-third of my respondents lived with parents, grand parents, or siblings. This percentage included young twenty-somethings, but also older men who shared their homes with family members and sometimes served as primary caretakers for their mothers and grand mothers. While my sample is not representative, my research suggests that the relationship between sexuality, family, and migration for Cuban American gay men is distinct from the dominant narrative of gay identity in the United States.</p>
		
		<h3>Family and Migration</h3>
		<p>The dominant story about the emergence of modern homosexual communities in the United States tells a particular story about the role of family and migration. John D&#x2019;Emilio argues that changes produced by urbanization and industrial capitalism created the possibility for men and women to organize their lives outside a heterosexual family unit. For men in particular, D&#x2019;Emilio maintains, the forces of industrial capitalism removed them from a household economy and made the heterosexual family an affective group rather than the only means of economic survival.<sup><a id="footnote_back1"></a><a href="#footnote1">1</a></sup> Allan B&#xE9;rub&#xE9; argues that the internal migrations caused by World War II played a key role in the development of a gay group identity in the United States. Men and women who enlisted in the military left their heterosexual family units, entered sex-segregated environments, and later returned to port cities and metropolitan areas after military service. In these new locales populated in large part by internal migrants like themselves, men and women relied primarily on commercial establishments, rather than family, to organize their social and sexual lives. An increase in divorce rates, greater sexual permissiveness, and the increased commercialization of sexuality and leisure time also contributed to the possibility of organizing one&#x2019;s life outside the heterosexual family.<sup><a id="footnote_back2"></a><a href="#footnote2">2</a></sup></p>
		<p>D&#x2019;Emilio and B&#xE9;rub&#xE9; rightfully emphasize the role of structural factors in organizing gender/sexual identities and communities. Their analyses, however, most strongly account for U.S.-born Anglo men and women. What is the impact of international migration (as opposed to domestic migration) on families of origin? How does race figure into these analyses? In his study of &#x201C;gay&#x201D; Mexican immigrants to the United States, Lionel Cant&#xfa; Jr. has noted that &#x201C;in the case of international migration, family-economic interdependence may continue to play a role in relations and identity even while reconfigured through migratory processes and while new systems of support are created.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back3"></a><a href="#footnote3">3</a></sup> In other words, whereas decreasing dependency on families of origin coincided with domestic migration for the men D&#x2019;Emilio and B&#xE9;rub&#xE9; discuss, international migration can increase dependency on families of origin and extended families. The racialization of some immigrants and the loss of citizenship rights can also further increase dependency, for inter national migrants cannot necessarily rely on the state for support and might enlist family networks for economic and social support and, indeed, protection from the state.<sup><a id="footnote_back4"></a><a href="#footnote4">4</a></sup> In these cases, heterosexual families of origin continue to be necessary sources of economic survival and can provide a valued space for cultural resistance against forms of racial discrimination even as they may reinforce heteronormativity. In addition, Cant&#xfa; documents how gay Mexican immigrants who manage to gain social and/or economic status in the United States find that their families are dependent on them. In this case, he argues that &#x201C;economic interdependence . . . may actually facilitate familial acceptance.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back5"></a><a href="#footnote5">5</a></sup></p>
		<p>Although Cuban Americans in Miami are unlikely to discuss their families in terms of resistance to racial discrimination&#x2014;most do not see themselves as a nonwhite racial group&#x2014;Lisandro P&#xE9;rez has shown that, at least for early immigrant waves, family structure was related to economic success. The majority of Cuban immigrants prior to 1980 either had close relatives living in South Florida or had arrived with biological family. Analyzing 1980 census data, P&#xE9;rez found that Cuban Americans had lower fertility rates, were more likely to have three-generation households, and had a higher percentage of women in the labor force than other Latino groups. In addition, grandparents contributed to family income directly through government aid and indirectly by providing in-house child care, an advantage that in turn facilitated Cuban American women&#x2019;s participation in the paid labor force.<sup><a id="footnote_back6"></a><a href="#footnote6">6</a></sup> These demographic data indicate that a particular type of Cuban American family (three-generation, dual-income, with few children and possible government aid) was intrinsically linked with the dominant success story narrative, as proved by high family income. Also, members of these types of family were more likely to be successful entrepreneurs, the common protagonists of the success story. Therefore the pooling of resources involved in multigenerational households constituted one important factor in the economic positioning of Cuban Americans.</p>
		<p>Research on gay families has noted differences between Anglo and non-Anglo respondents.<sup><a id="footnote_back7"></a><a href="#footnote7">7</a></sup> For example, in her foundational study on &#x201C;families we choose&#x201D; based on interviews with gay men and lesbians living in San Francisco, Kath Weston acknowledges that people of color were more likely to draw &#x201C;connections between sexual identity, race, class, ethnicity, and kinship&#x201D; and to privilege &#x201C;blood&#x201D; families over &#x201C;chosen&#x201D; families.<sup><a id="footnote_back8"></a><a href="#footnote8">8</a></sup> In his more recent study of gay families, Christopher Carrington also notes that</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>Latino/Asian/African-identified lesbigay families recurrently report more extensive connections to biolegal relatives than do Euro-American families, and further, they more often than not conceive of family in strongly biolegal terms. For instance, they report greater exchange of money and material goods with biolegal relatives.<sup><a id="footnote_back9"></a><a href="#footnote9">9</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Both Weston and Carrington quickly explain away these differences. Weston is unwilling to grant that people of color really do have different relationships to their families and to the coming-out process than do middle-class, nonethnically defined whites. Carrington attributes the differences in his study to the geographic proximity to families of origin as opposed to race/ethnicity. In fact, 90 percent of Carrington&#x2019;s Anglo respondents grew up outside the state and subsequently migrated to California. The &#x201C;wide majority&#x201D; of non-Anglo respondents, on the other hand, had grown up in California and because their &#x201C;biolegal kin live in the area, kin relations become more extensive and more pressing.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back10"></a><a href="#footnote10">10</a></sup> Rather than attribute findings to geographic proximity or race/ ethnicity, I would ask why it is that although 90 percent of Carrington&#x2019;s Anglo respondents moved from out of state to San Francisco, the majority of people of color grew up and remained in California? One possible explanation is that the developmental pattern of moving far away from families of origin in one&#x2019;s early adulthood is more common (and likely) for middle-and upper-class, college-educated Anglos than in it is for others. If that is true, then how do working-class people, people without higher education, and people of color develop gay lives and cultures with their families of origin in their figurative (and sometimes literal) backyards?</p>
		<p>In his popular book about gay life in America, Frank Browning shares an observation of a gay male couple, Luna and Gilberto, that might shed some light on how Cuban American families adapt to gay sons and their partners. According to Browning, Luna has been &#x201C;taken in as a member of the family&#x201D; by &#x201C;Gilberto&#x2019;s large traditional family . . . who knew that Luna and Gilberto were lovers.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back11"></a><a href="#footnote11">11</a></sup> Browning states that &#x201C;in no other place in America had [he] seen such close ties between gay men and their families&#x2014;a closeness made all the more remarkable by the fierce conservatism of Cuban Miami.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back12"></a><a href="#footnote12">12</a></sup> In his discussion of Cuban American and Puerto Rican gay men in Miami, Stephen P. Kurtz also notes that whereas Puerto Rican men chose to leave their biological homes when confronted with the gendered, heteronormative expectations of their families, the Cuban American gay men he interviewed did not consider this option.</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>Cuban men in this study felt extremely constrained&#x2014;much more than the Puerto Rican men&#x2014;to meet parental expectations. For all of them, developing strategies that enabled them to hide their homosexuality while remaining within the family circle became of paramount concern. To this day, all of the Cuban men (and none of the Puerto Rican men) live in the same cities as their close relatives.<sup><a id="footnote_back13"></a><a href="#footnote13">13</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Kurtz argues that Cuban American gay men living in Miami strive to live gay lives that do not preclude them from involvement with and proximity to biological family, and some of them achieve this balance by adopting masculine identities and appearances.<sup><a id="footnote_back14"></a><a href="#footnote14">14</a></sup></p>
		<p>Because I interviewed Cuban American gay men in Miami&#x2014;the metropolitan area with the highest concentration of Cuban Americans in the United States&#x2014;my study foregrounds the experiences of men who have chosen to stay in an area with a large population of co-ethnics and are more likely to live near their families of origin. If in D&#x2019;Emilio and B&#xE9;rub&#xE9;&#x2019;s analyses, domestic migration moved men and women away from their families of origin and offered distance from family surveillance, in my study, the most significant migration in my respondents&#x2019; lives was an international migration (theirs or their parents&#x2019;) from Cuba to the United States. The extent to which families of origin figured in the daily lives of the Cuban American gay men I interviewed formed a surprising characteristic of my sample. The majority of the men I interviewed maintained strong relationships with their families. Apart from the one-third of respondents who lived with their families of origin, most of the remaining respondents maintained regular contact with their families and expressed a special valuing of these relationships. Some of these were Generation X men who lived with heterosexual family because they could not afford to live on their own. Javier, for example, understood that the inability to afford to live alone characterized his generation: &#x201C;In better economic times I live on my own. If I fall short, like, I guess most of the quote, unquote &#x2019;slackers&#x2019; or &#x2019;X generation&#x2019; do, they end up going back home to their parents after they&#x2019;re in their early-to mid-20s like I have.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>Even men who did not share a home with families of origin maintained regular physical contact with family members. Most of my respondents described a commitment or obligation to their families of origin. The value of family was not only symbolic or abstract. Rather, it was grounded in men&#x2019;s everyday lives and included significant time commitments devoted to family responsibilities. For example, one respondent visited his mother every week to help her with any translation she needed; another visited his grandmother weekly in a nursing home; another ate dinner with his parents once a week; and another took regular vacations with his parents. I would not argue that these Cuban American gay men valued families of origin over chosen families, as Weston claims for her sample. Rather, I would argue that, especially in the case of men in long-term relationships, chosen families and families of origin interpenetrated one another.</p>
		<p>While a Cuban American family structure might in fact serve as a form of economic support, as P&#xE9;rez&#x2019;s research suggests, few men discussed their connection with their families in these terms. A couple of men, like Javier, did admit that they lived with family members for economic reasons. In general, though, respondents emphasized noneconomic modes of familial support that are less easy to measure than financial rewards. Respondents explained that families provided them with emotional support as well as a sense of home and a reliable source of advice. While he indicated that his family was &#x201C;very overprotective,&#x201D; Michael, who lived with his parents, added:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>You know, when we&#x2019;re young we tend to think, &#x201C;Oh god these fuckin&#x2019; Cuban parents,&#x201D; but as I get older I realize I have it good, and I have a great family, and I really can&#x2019;t complain. I see a lot of my American friends, who are not from here. Their families are all spread around. It&#x2019;s different, so I&#x2019;m lucky in that sense.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Rather than describe physical distance from family in positive terms, Michael reframed this distance as a loss. Although he was a gay man living with heterosexual parents who did not know about his sexuality, he considered himself &#x201C;lucky&#x201D; to be near them.</p>
		<p>Relationships with families of origin affected the way these men valorized disclosure and visibility. My research suggests that the relationship between financial status, family structure, migration, and gay lives that D&#x2019;Emilio and B&#xE9;rub&#xE9; highlight operates differently for Cuban American gay men in Miami. This difference, in turn, affects the kinds of family relationships that are both possible and desired by my respondents.</p>
		<p>None of the men I interviewed completely hid their homosexuality in all spheres of their lives. In fact, most respondents participated actively in many aspects of public gay cultures. Most also strongly valued maintaining relationships with their families of origin. However, most families of origin did not acknowledge or fully accept my respondents&#x2019; homosexuality. How then did the men manage to maintain strong family relationships while participating in a gay world? Most of the Cuban American gay men I interviewed employed strategies of nondisclosure in relation to families of origin. In other words, dominant narratives of coming out do not fully explain how the relationship between gay life and families of origin was negotiated by this sample. For instance, in her discussion of coming out, Weston found that almost all her respondents &#x201C;viewed disclosure to family as desirable.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back15"></a><a href="#footnote15">15</a></sup> What seemed most desirable to most of the men I spoke with was to maintain family relationships whether or not that prohibited the disclosure of a gay identity, in their opinion. Although representing an extreme position, Miguel, a Cuban-born man in his late thirties who came to the United States as a young boy, told me he felt his younger Cuban American gay male friends were making the &#x201C;biggest mistake of their lives&#x201D; coming out to their families because their families &#x201C;would never be able to accept it.&#x201D; Weston reports that most of the people she interviewed believed that &#x201C;deception has a negative effect on social relationships, undermining the trust considered a prerequisite for &#x2019;close&#x2019; connections.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back16"></a><a href="#footnote16">16</a></sup> My respondents did not simply equate nondisclosure with deception. Nondisclosure sometimes coexisted with a profound incorporation of gay partners, as was the case for Luna and Gilberto described by Browning.</p>
		<p>Those Cuban American gay men I interviewed who did not verbally disclose their sexuality to their families of origin did not necessarily identify their own nondisclosure as deception, nor did they necessarily understand themselves to be &#x201C;in the closet.&#x201D; As I argued in chapter 4, for some men, narratives of coming out made little sense to the way they understood their sexuality: because they understood their sexuality as visible and obvious, these kinds of declarations seemed redundant. Several men believed they were able to maintain relationships with their biological families because they never explicitly discussed their sexuality. Moreover, some assumed that their families knew they were gay. For example, Juan, a Cuban-born man in his midthirties who came to the United States as a young boy, explained that he was not &#x201C;completely out and open&#x201D; with his parents. If he were, &#x201C;things might be different, but I&#x2019;ve never made a decision because I don&#x2019;t know how it&#x2019;s going to turn out, and I don&#x2019;t want to take the chance, and since things now aren&#x2019;t bad, you know, why provoke a situation?&#x201D; Although Juan had never discussed his sexuality with his mother, he believed that &#x201C;she realizes it already. She might not want to deal with it . . . but she realizes it already. . . . She&#x2019;s smart enough not to ask me something she doesn&#x2019;t want to know the answer to.&#x201D; Although this lack of explicit discussion of sexuality might be interpreted as deception, it is important to note the extent to which Juan&#x2019;s partner, Jacobo, had been incorporated into Juan&#x2019;s family of origin. In fact, Juan and his boyfriend shared a one-bedroom condominium. They had dinner with Juan&#x2019;s parents regularly. Moreover, both men and their respective families had all celebrated the previous <span class="italic">nochebuena </span>(Christmas Eve) together: the shared holiday was significant because Christmas Eve is traditionally spent with extended family of origin in Cuban culture.</p>
		<p>At one point in the interview, Juan did invoke the language of deception, saying, &#x201C;to this day, to an extent, I live a double life.&#x201D; As he continued, the complexity of the relationship among Juan, Juan&#x2019;s parents, and Jacobo emerged:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>I&#x2019;m sure [my parents] know what&#x2019;s going on. I haven&#x2019;t talked to them about it. I haven&#x2019;t sat down and told my mom, &#x201C;Look, this and this and this is going on. And this is Jacobo. This is what Jacobo is.&#x201D; But they&#x2019;re not stupid. We&#x2019;ve been living together for four years, and it&#x2019;s a one-bedroom apartment, and there&#x2019;s only one bed. Initially when we first moved in together, I had a sofa bed, and the story was Jacobo slept on the sofa bed and I slept on the bed. But later on the sofa bed went, and they never said anything. My parents never said a thing, so it&#x2019;s just like that: it&#x2019;s kinda understood, and it&#x2019;s not talked about.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p>We discussed not only the relationships among Juan, his parents, and Jacobo but also the relationship between Juan&#x2019;s family of origin and Jacobo&#x2019;s family of origin. After discussing how well both sets of families got along during the Christmas holidays, I asked Juan whether sharing time with both families was important to him. He replied:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>Yeah, it&#x2019;s very important to me because that way it just simplifies everything. There&#x2019;s no headache that comes from when the in-laws don&#x2019;t like each other. Or, let&#x2019;s say my mom didn&#x2019;t like [Jacobo]. That would be terrible on me because my mom is the most important thing.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Similarly, Miguel, who believed young Cuban American gay men were making the &#x201C;biggest mistake of their lives&#x201D; by coming out, was living in his parents&#x2019; house with his partner at the time of our interview. However, Miguel did not consider his cohabitation with his boyfriend in his parents&#x2019; house a &#x201C;mistake&#x201D; like that of the younger men he had chastised because his was not a direct, open declaration. In his estimation, he and his boyfriend made an effort to maintain appearances, an effort that involved the performance of accepted masculinity, as I discuss in chapter 7.</p>
		<p>In situations like those of Juan and Miguel, where long-term partners are incorporated into the family of origin, partners were often referred to by the euphemistic &#x201C;amigo&#x201D; (friend) as opposed to &#x201C;novio&#x201D; (boyfriend) or &#x201C;marido&#x201D; (lover or husband). In other words, Miguel&#x2019;s mother would likely introduce her son&#x2019;s boyfriend as &#x201C;el amigo de Miguel&#x201D; (never &#x201C;el novio de Miguel&#x201D; or &#x201C;el marido de Miguel&#x201D;), although this euphemism could be understood to imply a relationship more intimate than that of mere friends.<sup><a id="footnote_back17"></a><a href="#footnote17">17</a></sup></p>
		<p>Unlike Juan and Miguel, Mart&#xED;n had spoken directly to his mother about his sexuality. He did not volunteer information, but his mother had read a journal in which Mart&#xED;n had described a liaison with another boy. Subsequently, Mart&#xED;n came home to find his mother setting his journal on fire. After this incident, she only rarely acknowledged knowing about his sexuality: &#x201C;She chooses to have selective memory about my sexuality. So you know, she has to deal with it her own way I suppose. To this day we have conversations and I clearly tell her, and, you know, she just won&#x2019;t acknowledge it, a complete block out.&#x201D; Mart&#xED;n added that physical distance and financial independence from his family allowed him to come to terms with his gay identity: &#x201C;becoming independent in other ways, becoming financially independent, living on my own&#x201D; facilitated his &#x201C;being comfortable&#x201D; with being gay. That being said, Mart&#xED;n lived only fifteen minutes away from both of his parents. When I asked him about his average week, he described spending his Saturdays visiting his grandmother, his sister, and the rest of his family. Therefore, even migrations away from the family often entailed only short trips that could be easily bridged by return visits and, in the case of this sample, did not usually involve cutting off close ties. Like Mart&#xED;n, other respondents had spoken explicitly with their families of origin, most often their mothers, about their sexuality. However, such explicit instances of coming out were often followed by a continued silence on the topic. Some interpreted these silences positively as &#x201C;silent acceptance,&#x201D; while others read them negatively as &#x201C;selective memory.&#x201D; Although the story with which I opened the chapter exemplifies a startlingly negative response by parents to a son&#x2019;s disclosure&#x2014;they sent him to psychiatric treatments to try to &#x201C;cure&#x201D; his homosexuality&#x2014;Rub&#xE9;n insisted that although he and his parents no longer spoke about his sexuality, they &#x201C;were close in other ways&#x201D;: &#x201C;We talk about school. We talk about my other friends. . . . We hang out a lot, we have dinner all the time, we&#x2019;re close.&#x201D;</p>
		<p>In a published interview, Eduardo Aparicio discusses the differences between &#x201C;acceptance&#x201D; in Anglo versus Cuban American contexts:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>In the Anglo culture, you verbalize all these things, you talk publicly about sexuality, you demand your rights through laws, you give testimonials on TV . . . but in Latin families, what occurs is an acceptance without talking about the issue. That, however, doesn&#x2019;t mean there is a rejection. On the contrary, there is almost a sheltering, a need to protect others. That&#x2019;s why your mother will tell you, &#x201C;It&#x2019;s OK, but don&#x2019;t tell your cousin or your uncle.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back18"></a><a href="#footnote18">18</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Hugo, a respondent who had disclosed his sexuality to his family, echoed this point. Hugo argued that Cuban American families in general are more accepting than people think: &#x201C;They could accept [a gay son]. Cubans here in the States are more, I feel like they&#x2019;re closer because they&#x2019;re not home. . . . They&#x2019;re united family wise more. So they&#x2019;re probably like, &#x2019;He&#x2019;s gay, but so what?,&#x2019; you know.&#x201D; Scholars and popular commentators have argued that immigration has made Cuban Americans and other immigrants more socially conservative because they are trying to re-create a static culture from their past. There is certainly ample evidence of this trend, and the Cuban Americans who supported Anita Bryant in the 1970s are but one example. However, Hugo points out, immigration or being &#x201C;not home&#x201D; might have also made Cuban American families more flexible and increased their ability to accept or incorporate gay sons into their midst.</p>
		
		<h3>Culturalist Evocations of the Latino Family</h3>
		<p>In my study, I found that families of origin and families of choice interpenetrated one another to produce a complex web of family disclosures and nondisclosures, closeness and distance. To be clear, public and explicit verbal acknowledgment of homosexuality by families of origin was highly uncommon. On the other hand, the extent to which longterm gay male partners were incorporated into families of origin and how men of all ages maintained regular, physical contact with families of origin were striking. How do we make sense of this apparent paradox and what conclusions can we draw about Cuban American gay culture and families?</p>
		<p>Putting this study in dialogue with other works about Latino gay men that discuss families helps address this question. For example, there are interesting parallels and differences between my findings and Rafael D&#xED;az&#x2019;s 1998 study on Latino gay men and HIV. As in my study, Latino gay men in D&#xED;az&#x2019;s sample said relationships with family of origin were central to their lives; some of the men interviewed in his study describe families of origin in positive terms, as a &#x201C;haven of security&#x201D;; most of the men in his study did not openly discuss their sexuality with families of origin; and most of the men believed that participation in families of origin required silence about their sexuality.<sup><a id="footnote_back19"></a><a href="#footnote19">19</a></sup> Although there are several commonalities in our empirical data, D&#xED;az and I come to quite different conclusions.</p>
		<p>D&#xED;az argues that men who did not openly discuss their sexuality with families of origin necessarily had to segregate gay friends and partners from families of origin. He says, &#x201C;For those individuals who remain in close connection to their families, identification with and participation in family life requires that their sexual lives, their sexual partners or lovers, and their gay friends be excluded from the social, affective network of family membership.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back20"></a><a href="#footnote20">20</a></sup> This assumption that nondisclosure of sexuality coincides with segregation between families of origin and gay friends and partners seems contradicted by D&#xED;az&#x2019;s own evidence (and is not the pattern I found either). For example, one of D&#xED;az&#x2019;s respondents told the interviewer that he believed his family of origin knows about his life, &#x201C;but we don&#x2019;t talk about it.&#x201D; When asked about how he knew that his family understood, he responded:</p>
		
		<div class="poetry">
		<p class="noIndent">RESPONDENT: I think I was a very effeminate little boy and I don&#x2019;t ever remember my family putting me down for just being who I was, and as I developed into adolescence I think I stopped being effeminate but I was more in touch with my own desires and sexuality. And when I was sixteen years old, I started my gay life and I was never ashamed or embarrassed to bring my gay friends home and sometimes they were pretty obvious. So to me the indicators were like my family sees me surrounded by these very unusual type people and yet they don&#x2019;t put it down or anything. They just kind of allow me to be myself.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">INTERVIEWER: But it&#x2019;s never been openly discussed?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">R: It&#x2019;s never been openly discussed.<sup><a id="footnote_back21"></a><a href="#footnote21">21</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>Far from an account of a family life that required exclusion of gay community, this account seems to stress the incorporation of gay friends, an emerging adolescent gay community, and gender-transgressive expressions of male homosexuality into families of origin. In D&#xED;az&#x2019;s analysis, however, this evidence in the respondent&#x2019;s account is completely overshadowed by the final question and answer that reveal that the respondent did not openly discuss sexuality with his family of origin. For D&#xED;az, &#x201C;true acceptance&#x201D; by families of origin requires open discussion and explicit, ongoing verbal communication about sexuality. Even if respondents asserted the importance of family support, if this type of communication did not accompany them, D&#xED;az classifies them as &#x201C;stories of tolerance and non-abuse rather than true acceptance.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back22"></a><a href="#footnote22">22</a></sup></p>
		<p>This logic is not D&#xED;az&#x2019;s alone. As discussed in chapter 1, since the 1970s, the mainstream gay and lesbian movement in the United States had privileged a strategy of &#x201C;coming out, asserting homosexual visibility as a basis for basic rights,&#x201D; and D&#xED;az&#x2019;s model for a healthy gay identity is clearly &#x201C;homosexual men in the Western industrialized world.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back23"></a><a href="#footnote23">23</a></sup> For this group, he argues that membership in gay community &#x201C;requires a shift of referent group from the family to the peer group, which is a re-working of social support systems and personal loyalties away from family of origin.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back24"></a><a href="#footnote24">24</a></sup> I agree with him that Latino gay men in both of our studies clearly did not fully shift their referent group away from families of origin; many of the men in my study very actively maintained relationships with families of origin in their adult lives. Where I disagree with D&#xED;az is in the assumption that the model of homosexual development so typical in the Western industrialized world (and especially among the white middle-class populations of that world) is the only way in which to lead a healthy and fulfilling life and that any other model is necessarily regressive and inferior.</p>
		<p>In his study of sexuality in Guadalajara, Mexico, H&#xE9;ctor Carrillo defines sexual silence as &#x201C;a widespread method used to keep transgressive sexual behavior under wraps in order to maintain the appearance of normality.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back25"></a><a href="#footnote25">25</a></sup> While he argues along the lines of D&#xED;az that sexual silence was a &#x201C;major roadblock for open acceptance of sexual diversity&#x201D; that came with &#x201C;a price in terms of the inability to achieve full acceptance of sex, as well as potentially negative psychological effects,&#x201D; he also argues:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>I would be wary of overly pathologizing the use of the strategy. . . . sexual silence also has a productive side, not only in relation to tacit tolerance that it creates but also in terms of sex itself . . . sexual silence also flavors cultural scripts about seduction, sexual passion, and the enactment of sex itself.<sup><a id="footnote_back26"></a><a href="#footnote26">26</a></sup></p>
		</div>
		
		<p>In his subtle analysis of interviews with Dominican immigrant gay men living in New York City, Carlos Decena extends this concept of tacit tolerance. Decena uses the term <span class="italic">tacit subjects </span>to refer to what is assumed to be known but is not discussed. He insists that we should distinguish between &#x201C;refusing to discuss an openly lived homosexuality and silence. . . . What is tacit is neither secret nor silent.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back27"></a><a href="#footnote27">27</a></sup> Decena states plainly that &#x201C;self-realization as a man who loves men does not require moving away from the biological family.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back28"></a><a href="#footnote28">28</a></sup></p>
		<p>To make his argument, D&#xED;az relies on the concept of familism. Quoting Gerardo Mar&#xED;n and Barbara Van Oss Mar&#xED;n, D&#xED;az states that familism is a &#x201C;cultural value that involves individuals&#x2019; strong identification with and attachment to their nuclear and extended families, and strong feelings of loyalty, reciprocity, and solidarity among members of the same family.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back29"></a><a href="#footnote29">29</a></sup> D&#xED;az asserts that for Latino gay men, familism prevents &#x201C;homosexuals from denouncing the family&#x2019;s homophobia and demanding acceptance&#x201D; and &#x201C;tends to become internalized in a self-punitive way.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back30"></a><a href="#footnote30">30</a></sup></p>
		<p>I bring a healthy skepticism to such culturalist evocations to the Latino family primarily because the family patterns of people of color in the United States have been characterized as dysfunctional in much social science literature regardless of whether social scientists are pointing out the cohesiveness or lack of cohesiveness of these families. In other words, apparently contradictory evidence is used to argue the same conclusion. As Lionel Cant&#xfa; Jr. has carefully deconstructed, culturalist arguments tend to homogenize Latino cultures; represent Latino cultures as fixed and static tradition-bound systems characteristic of a past from which the West has already evolved and progressed; and depict Latino culture as an exotic &#x201C;other&#x201D; against which the unidentified Western norm can be positively compared.<sup><a id="footnote_back31"></a><a href="#footnote31">31</a></sup> These critiques of cultur-alist discussions of Latino families have been applied to a literature that has focused mostly on heterosexually organized biolegal families. However, I would argue that this literature also provides lessons for those writing about gay and lesbian chosen families. Although family institutions provide a series of privileges for members, historically only those with the right kinds of families have fully reaped these rewards. Those with the wrong kinds of families&#x2014;for example, racialized families headed by a strong female with &#x201C;too many&#x201D; children&#x2014;may garner heteronormative privileges, but these privileges are limited and counter acted by the concomitant pathologization of their families. In addition, state intervention and regulation of marginalized populations often occur precisely through the institution of the family. Given the history of how the social sciences and the state have worked in tandem to identify and control deviant families, research on families that are only now beginning to be recognized by the state must be particularly vigilant.</p>
		<p>With my research on Cuban American gay men, I bear the brunt of a related concern&#x2014;that my discussion of these men&#x2019;s daily life interactions and economic and social interdependence with families of origin may be interpreted as further evidence of the commonsense assumption that Latinos are simply, ahistorically, and essentially family-oriented. While wanting to avoid a culturalist argument that Latino culture values family more highly than Anglos, I also acknowledge the differences my gay male respondents experienced with their families of origin. These differences were related to how the men I interviewed discussed coming out and how they understood the importance of disclosure, deception, and family. I argue that, taking into account structural and historical factors, this group of Cuban American gay men did have more regular contact with families of origin than has been documented in studies of Anglo gay men. At the same time, the Cuban American gay men I interviewed use strategies of nondisclosure, which is not the same as saying they are in the closet. I am left with the question, How do men who fully participate in public gay cultures, integrate their partners into their families of origin, share a home with their partners, but do not discuss their sexuality with their parents, complicate our discussion of visibility?</p>
		<p>The Cuban American gay men I interviewed made concerted efforts to maintain physical and emotional closeness with family. It could be that family provided a place to be Cuban and maintain ties to an ethnic culture that was experienced as less oppressive than other spheres. As I discuss in the next chapter, masculine self-identification also helped ease relationships with families. Men who successfully performed normative masculinity believed that their families and other hetero-normative Cuban American communities accepted them because of this. Their masculinity freed them from further community surveillance and reinforced their patriarchal privileges. As men, they were allowed and expected to move through public spheres regularly, and their doing so was not cause for suspicion as it might have been for female members of the family. Their successful performance of masculinity also helped them reap a series of masculine privileges in the home&#x2014;including services like laundry and cooking provided by some mothers and grandmothers to their sons and grandsons. The benefits they received as men helped explain their attachment to masculine gender identification. In the next chapter, I discuss these investments in masculinity and the multiple discourses of masculinity navigated by Cuban American gay men.</p>
		
		<hr /><ol class="footnotes"><li id="footnote1"><p>D&#x2019;Emilio, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities, </span>11.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back1">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote2"><p>D&#x2019;Emilio, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities</span>; B&#xE9;rub&#xE9;, <span class="italic">Coming Out under Fire.</span></p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back2">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote3"><p>Cant&#xfa;, <span class="italic">Sexuality of Migration, </span>29; Lionel Cant&#xfa; Jr., &#x201C;A Place Called Home: A Queer Political Economy of Mexican Immigrant Men&#x2019;s Family Experiences,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Queer Families, Queer Politics: Challenging Culture and the State, </span>ed. Mary Bernstein and Renate Reinman (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001), 115.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back3">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote4"><p>For more on immigrant sexuality, see Cant&#xfa;, &#x201C;Place Called Home,&#x201D; 112&#x2013;36; Lionel Cant&#xfa; Jr., &#x201C;Entre Hombres/Between Men: Latino Masculinities and Homosexualities,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Gay Masculinities, </span>ed. Peter M. Nardi (Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 2000), 224&#x2013;46; Manalansan, <span class="italic">Global Divas</span>; Luibh&#xE9;id and Cant&#xfa;, <span class="italic">Queer Migrations</span>; Gloria Gonz&#225;lez- L&#xf3;pez, <span class="italic">Erotic Journeys: Mexican Immigrants and Their Sex Lives </span>(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005); Pe&#xf1;a, &#x201C;Latina/o Sexualities in Motion.&#x201D; See also Eithne Luibh&#xE9;id, ed., &#x201C;Queer/Migration,&#x201D; special issue, <span class="italic">GLQ </span>14, nos. 2&#x2013;3 (2008).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back4">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote5"><p>Cant&#xfa;, <span class="italic">Sexuality of Migration, </span>137.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back5">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote6"><p>Lisandro P&#xE9;rez, &#x201C;Immigrant Economic Adjustment and Family Organization: The Cuban Success Story Reexamined,&#x201D; <span class="italic">International Migration Review </span>20, no. 73 (1986): 4&#x2013;20; P&#xE9;rez, &#x201C;The Cuban Population in the United States: The Results of the 1980 U.S. Census of Population,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Cuban Studies </span>15, no. 2 (1985): 1&#x2013;18.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back6">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote7"><p>For early studies of gay and lesbian people of color and coming- out processes, see Connie S. Chan, &#x201C;Issues of Sexual Identities in an Ethnic Minority: The Case of Chinese American Lesbian, Gay Male, and Bisexual People,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Identities over the Lifespan: Psychological Perspectives, </span>ed. Anthony R. D&#x2019;Augelli and Charlotte J. Patterson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 87&#x2013;101; Esp&#xED;n, &#x201C;Issues of Identity,&#x201D; 35&#x2013;55; Beverly Greene, &#x201C;Ethnic-Minority Lesbians and Gay Men: Mental Health and Treatment Issues,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology </span>62 (1994): 243&#x2013;51; Edward S. Morales, &#x201C;HIV Infection and Hispanic Gay and Bisexual Men,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Science</span>s 12, no. 2 (1990): 212&#x2013;22; Hilda A. Hidalgo and E. H. Christenson, &#x201C;The Puerto Rican Lesbian and the Puerto Rican Community,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Journal of Homosexuality </span>2 (1976&#x2013;77): 109&#x2013;21.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back7">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote8"><p>Weston, <span class="italic">Families We Choose </span>(New York: Columbia University Press, 1991), 56.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back8">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote9"><p>Carrington, <span class="italic">No Place Like Home: Relationships and Family Life among Lesbians and Gay Men </span>(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 138&#x2013;39.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back9">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote10"><p>Ibid., 139.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back10">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote11"><p>Frank Browning, <span class="italic">The Culture of Desire: Paradox and Perversity in Gay Lives Today </span>(New York: Crown, 1993), 144.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back11">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote12"><p>Ibid., 143.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back12">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote13"><p>Stephen P. Kurtz, &#x201C;Butterflies under Cover: Cuban and Puerto Rican Gay Masculinities in Miami,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Journal of Men&#x2019;s Studies </span>7, no. 3 (1999): 11.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back13">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote14"><p>For more on masculinity and masculine appearance, see chapter 7.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back14">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote15"><p>Weston, <span class="italic">Families We Choose, </span>68.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back15">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote16"><p>Ibid., 50.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back16">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote17"><p>Carlos Ulises Decena also found a similar use of &#x201C;amigo&#x201D; among the Dominican immigrants (&#x201C;Tacit Subjects,&#x201D; <span class="italic">GLQ </span>14, nos. 2&#x2013;3 [2008]: 342&#x2013; 43).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back17">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote18"><p>Fabiola Santiago, &#x201C;The Poetry of Healing,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>February 20, 1997.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back18">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote19"><p>D&#xED;az, <span class="italic">Latino Gay Men and HIV, </span>89.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back19">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote20"><p>Ibid., 96.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back20">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote21"><p>Ibid., 90.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back21">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote22"><p>Ibid.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back22">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote23"><p>Dennis Altman, <span class="italic">The Homosexualization of America </span>(Boston: Beacon, 1982), 128; D&#xED;az, <span class="italic">Latino Gay Men and HIV, </span>102.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back23">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote24"><p>D&#xED;az, <span class="italic">Latino Gay Men and HIV, </span>102.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back24">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote25"><p>Carrillo, <span class="italic">Night Is Young, </span>132.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back25">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote26"><p>Ibid., 147, 149.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back26">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote27"><p>Decena, &#x201C;Tacit Subjects,&#x201D; 340.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back27">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote28"><p>Decena, <span class="italic">Tacit Subjects, </span>42.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back28">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote29"><p>D&#xED;az, <span class="italic">Latino Gay Men and HIV, </span>92, quoting G. Mar&#xED;n and B. V. Mar&#xED;n, <span class="italic">Research with Hispanic Populations </span>(Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1991), 13.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back29">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote30"><p>D&#xED;az, <span class="italic">Latino Gay Men and HIV, </span>94.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back30">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote31"><p>Cant&#xfa;, &#x201C;Place Called Home,&#x201D; 112&#x2013;36; Cant&#xfa;,&#x201C;Entre Hombres/Between Men,&#x201D; 226&#x2013;29.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back31">back</a></p></li></ol></div></body></html>