<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>CONCLUSION</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
      
      
		<h2>CONCLUSION</h2>
		<h4>&#xa0;</h4>
		
		<p>THIS BOOK BEGINS AND ENDS with highly visible forms of gender transgression associated with Cuban male homosexuality. As stated earlier, the <span class="italic">locas </span>who came to the United States as part of the Mariel boatlift were the original inspiration for this project. Likewise, the <span class="italic">locas </span>whom I discuss in chapter 8 were important cultural interlocutors that complicated my research questions and shaped my understanding of Cuban American gay culture. Whereas I hope to center these highly visible Cuban American gay social actors, my project also highlights the erasure and reinvention of gender transgressions.</p>
		<p>My goal is to complicate our analysis of the politics of visibility as it relates to racialized and queer cultures. As I document throughout this manuscript, visibility played a key role in both the control of and empowerment of Cuban homosexual male populations. In Cuba before the Mariel boatlift, Cuban state authorities identified visible (i.e., gender-transgressive) male homosexuality as a threat to the state, and men who embodied certain visible characteristics associated with effeminate male homosexuality faced persecution. I use the term <span class="italic">state gaze </span>to discuss how male homosexuality was identified and subject to state control precisely through gendered characteristics believed to be socially visible. Ironically, the Cuban state&#x2019;s persecution made homosexuality more visible to a wider national and international public.</p>
		<p>When the 1980 Mariel boatlift occurred, the Cuban state actively encouraged negatively valued populations, among them &#x201C;obvious&#x201D; homo -sexu als, to emigrate. Some in this generation imagined the United States to be a land of unrestrained gay freedom. In the United States during the 1970s, gay identity politics were developing that were strongly invested in a particular notion of visibility. The logic of gay visibility was that group rights could be ensured only through group recognition and group recognition could be achieved only through an explicit and visible articulation of group identity. A backlash against this politics ignited in South Florida, with the help of Anita Bryant, in the late 1970s. The audacity of gay visibility shocked Bryant and her followers who could tolerate closeted homosexuals exhibiting appropriate shame but who were unwilling to accept this new generation of gay activists.</p>
		<p>For many in the Mariel generation, the gay freedom they expected to encounter in the United States was one that allowed (and perhaps even celebrated) the expressions of homosexuality that had been restricted in Cuba. For the Mariel generation of <span class="italic">locas, </span>a strategy of hyper visible gender transgressions was an explicit challenge to the state gaze that had structured their lives prior to migration. If in Cuba they had to be very careful not to exhibit gender transgressions associated with male homosexuality, in the United States they expected to flaunt them. And, many flaunted, celebrated, and expressed their identities in ways that were culturally relevant to them, but they were entering a local area that was far from embracing the gay visibility that many of them embodied. In addition, these expressions of gay visibility did not neatly align with the politics of U.S.-style gay activists. While &#x201C;coming out&#x201D; and being proud were key elements of U.S.-style gay activism, the success of this movement also tended to center masculine men and marginalize the kinds of gender transgressions seen in many of the Mariel generation. As Jesse Monteagudo&#x2019;s comments in chapter 2 suggest, even gay Latino activists in the United States did not see the visibility politics of gender transgression as serious, or as &#x201C;politics&#x201D; at all.</p>
		<p>The Mariel gay generation was visible not only in terms of gender and sexuality. They were also a racialized, stigmatized, first-generation immigrant population. For these reasons, they were both more visible and more eagerly erased. This generation&#x2019;s poverty and detention made them more visible. From the broken sponsorship cases I document in chapter 3 that captured the media spotlight to the young gender-transgressive immigrants who lived in small apartments in what was to become South Beach, this generation seemed visible in ways that challenged gay communities and Cuban American communities that had previously lived in the Miami area. Accounts from the post-1980 period indicate that previous gay residents did not fully appreciate the gay expressions of the Mariel generation. Cuban Americans who had been living in Miami prior to 1980 and cherished their visibility as &#x201C;Golden Exiles&#x201D; worried that the negative visibility that came with Mariel would shatter their placement in the U.S. national imaginary. I argue that the stigma of the Mariel gay generation contributed to its systematic erasure. This study shows how this population was exposed and erased in media contexts. More importantly, however, this study documents how Cuban American gay men from the 1990s to the present largely forgot the Mariel generation.</p>
		<p>Although I argue that this stigmatized gay Mariel migration has been recently remembered in positive ways, the sting of the 1980 stigma is far from absent. What I hope to illustrate is how the history of the Mariel boatlift continues to shape the development of Cuban American gay culture in Miami even when (or especially when) Mariel is not mentioned at all. For example, the investment of the men I interviewed during the 1990s in masculinity and their distancing from effeminacy cannot be fully understood outside Mariel&#x2019;s history. I argue this is the case even when they do not mention Mariel in their interview accounts. The silences about Mariel, and the erasure of a highly visible gender-transgressive migration, help structure the identities that are embraced and seem possible for many Cuban American gay men. Men&#x2019;s navigation of family relations is also carefully mediated by visibility. As I discuss in chapter 6, most of the men I interviewed regularly participated in public gay cultures and also sought to maintain relations with families of origin, something most believed required the performance of masculinity. Cuban American gay men believed that successful performance of normative masculinity confirmed their presumed heterosexuality, and therefore eased relationships with families of origin. In other words, if they were visibly masculine, they were assumed to be heterosexual, and therefore, their families would not question their sexuality. Narratives of Cuba, the most hypervisible of Miami&#x2019;s ethnic discourses, are also invoked in the politics of visibility. Homosexuality was visible in Cuban culture. In negative terms, male homosexuals were the butt of cultural jokes and male homosexuality was identified by the state as a problem. This, however, allowed male homosexuality a centrality in Cuban culture. As Eduardo Aparicio argues, Cuban American gay men were able to claim a culture that was both simultaneously Cuban and gay, and this claim could be culturally legible (even if not widely accepted). For some Cuban gay men I interviewed, a U.S. politics of visibility and coming out did not fully capture their self-understandings&#x2014;not because they were &#x201C;in the closet&#x201D; but because they believed their gender/sexual identity was &#x201C;obvious,&#x201D; which therefore made &#x201C;coming out&#x201D; redundant. By juxtaposing the visibility politics of gay men in Cuba and the United States across time, it is clear that what is experienced as liberatory, what is politically valued, and who is in a position to make these valuations shift across national/ cultural boundaries and across time.</p>
		<p>This study also points to the complicated politics of racialization by focusing on a group that is ambiguously placed in local and national racial hierarchies. Although Latinos are generally considered nonwhite in the U.S. racial consciousness, in Miami light-skinned Cuban Americans are generally accepted as white. In addition, most self-identify as white. This study helps reveal the process of racialization by pointing to the small fissures in this racial identity. The dominant representation of Cuban Americans from the 1960s to 1980 was that of the &#x201C;Golden Exiles.&#x201D; This narrative was interwoven with the &#x201C;success story&#x201D; narrative that emphasized the work ethic and related economic success of Cuban immigrants in the United States. The image of light-skinned Cuban Americans, who were successful and positive contributors to U.S. society, intertwined racial, ethnic, and economic discourses. This image of Cuban (white) success was not only central in U.S. discourses but also dear to Cuban Americans themselves. The 1980 Mariel boatlift presented the most substantial challenge to Cuban American claims to whiteness. I argue that the stigmas of blackness and gender-transgressive male homosexuality coincided in this migration. The hypervisibility of this migration&#x2014;with a focus on dark-skinned immigrants and gender-transgressive immigrants who were in state control for some time&#x2014;scared many Cuban Americans, who feared that their positive reputation would be permanently lost.</p>
		<p>Fifteen to twenty-five years after Mariel, Cuban American claims to whiteness in the context of Miami have survived. Although all of the men I interviewed would be considered white in Miami&#x2019;s racial classification system, I argue that their distancing from muscle queen aesthetics (discussed in chapter 7) signals a race-based critique that avoids explicit language of race. If we use census data exclusively, the percentage of the black-Hispanic population in Miami has not greatly increased in the last few decades. However, other observations indicate that Miami&#x2019;s Latino (and Cuban American population) is much more racially diverse and that dark-skinned Cuban Americans are choosing to remain in South Florida (as opposed to settling in New York or Chicago) and claiming a visible place in Miami&#x2019;s cultural and media institutions. Marytrini, whom I discuss in chapter 8, is an example of this. Her work as a drag artist illustrates the potential of this more racially diverse generation. Her performances articulate a different perspective that was largely absent or silenced in Miami&#x2019;s Cuban American gay male culture. However, her work also reveals the extent to which brusque racial hierarchies, that sometimes combine the worst of U.S. and Cuban racisms, continue to structure relations in Miami.</p>
		
		<h3>Structures and <span class="italic">Rastros</span></h3>
		<p>In the introduction I highlighted Raymond Williams&#x2019;s structure of feeling and Avery Gordon&#x2019;s concept of the &#x201C;sociology of haunting,&#x201D; both of which stress the importance of analyzing less-articulated ways of being that, although not fully visible and explicitly articulated, still &#x201C;set palpable pressures and set effective limits on experience and action.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back1"></a><a href="#footnote1">1</a></sup> This theoretical framework puts the focus on the hypervisibilities and fleeting visibilities that I discuss the throughout the book: the gender-transgressive Mariel generation that was both highly visible yet erased from the official record; the silences in men&#x2019;s accounts; the complexity of racialization without the explicit language of race. This theoretical framework also poses the methodological challenge: How do social analysts analyze structures of feeling? When the traces <span class="italic">(rastros) </span>of a culture are fleeting, how do you document them? The overall methodological design of this book seeks to address these questions. Interdisciplinary methodological tools were quite helpful in this regard. When I started to push up against the limits of the ethnographic present, a historical perspective that centered the state&#x2019;s role allowed me to address questions that seemed unanswerable. In this way, I shifted both methodologically (from ethnography to archival methods) and from a micro to macro perspective. Juxtaposing what men said in interviews, what I observed in the field, and what I found in archival records helped provide a more complex analysis. Shifting my gaze from the state level to the street level also helped me see what was not always in the official record. This combination of methods and levels of perspectives helps define <span class="italic">Oye Loca.</span>
		</p>
		<p>Through this method(s), I have attempted to face a methodological challenge posed by cultural studies scholarship in the last three decades. While our theoretical critique and the sophistication of our analysis continue to grow by leaps and bounds, our methodologies have not always expanded in the same ways. This has led to a huge gap between what is seen as &#x201C;theoretically sophisticated&#x201D; work and what is seen as &#x201C;empirical work.&#x201D; I would argue that this divide greatly limits our abilities as social analysts. Theoretically challenging work that has only a fleeting connection to our material world and empirical research that does not push beyond what is visible on the surface has limited utility to those of us who want to write social research that can both accurately diagnose our social context and play a role in creating a better future.</p>
		
		<hr /><ol class="footnotes"><li id="footnote1"><p>Williams, <span class="italic">Marxism and Literature.</span></p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back1">back</a></p></li></ol></div></body></html>