<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>4 P&#xe1;jaration and Transculturation: Language and Meaning in Gay Cuban Miami</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
      
      
		<h2>4 <span class="italic">P&#193;JARATION </span>AND TRANSCULTURATION</h2>
		<h4>Language and Meaning in Gay Cuban Miami</h4>
		
		<p>THE GAY MARIEL MIGRATION is one of many migrations that contributed to (gay) Miami in the 1990s. Other migrations from Cuba prior to Mariel (&#x201C;Golden Exiles&#x201D;) and post-Mariel (&#x201C;los balseros&#x201D;), as well as migrations from other parts of Latin America and the Caribbean, contributed to a transcultural and diverse gay culture in this U.S. city. In this chapter and those that follow, I analyze the Cuban American gay cultures that emerged in transcultural Miami since the 1990s. As a hub of globalized labor, cultural projects, information, and capital, Miami is a site of multilingual gay cultures historically linked to U.S. urban gay life and Latin America. In discussing the globalization of gay culture, scholars such as Dennis Altman have focused primarily on the influence of Western, Anglo gay culture on the third world and developing nations.<sup><a id="footnote_back1"></a><a href="#footnote1">1</a></sup> I prefer the approach of Richard Parker, who in his work on gay cultures in Brazil focuses on how Anglo-European gay culture is selectively used and transformed in non-U.S. contexts. He argues that the &#x201C;importation of international gay styles and symbols . . . within the Brazilian gay world is a good deal more than just an unconscious extension of international capitalism or a sign on Anglo-European cultural imperialism. The appropriation of such signs and symbols . . . is a far more complex and dialectical interaction than simplistic notions of external imposition would otherwise suggest.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back2"></a><a href="#footnote2">2</a></sup> He argues that Brazilian gay men &#x201C;adapt the signs and symbols of international gay life . . . to create a repertoire of symbolic resources that build meaning and make sense of the world around them, and to imagine and ultimately manipulate other worlds in other places.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back3"></a><a href="#footnote3">3</a></sup> In this chapter, I analyze a different side of these globalization processes&#x2014;the impact of immigrant, transnational, and minority gay cultures on a U.S. urban setting. Specifically, I use language to discuss the meaning-making and selective adaptation of Cuban American gay men living in Miami since the 1990s and ask how the migration of people from throughout Latin America to the United States through entry cities like Miami influence U.S. gay culture. In this multicultural and transnational context, how is language used to construct gay and ethnic communities?</p>
		<p>Through their use of language, we can observe the cultural negotiations and innovations made by different groups of Cuban American gay men. Latino gay men who are monolingual Spanish speakers, monolingual English speakers, and multilingual speakers with different levels of proficiency communicate with one another, have sex with one another, and create communities separately and together. Culture is literally made in and through these interactions. Power is not absent, of course. For example, the choice to speak English or Spanish in a particular setting is not available to monolingual speakers. Not demonstrating cultural competency in a job interview that requires strong English skills can cost someone a much-needed job. In Miami, not speaking Spanish can cost someone a job as well, and there are other cultural costs to limited Spanish-language proficiency.</p>
		<p>I explore how Cuban American gay men draw from U.S.-and Cuban-based cultural and linguistic histories and use Cuban Spanish, English, and Spanglish to construct gay communities and transnational identities.<sup><a id="footnote_back4"></a><a href="#footnote4">4</a></sup> I analyze how urban Anglo gay culture and language are incorporated, used, rejected, or rearticulated in a multilingual U.S. city increasingly defined by immigrants from Latin America and the Caribbean. While the influence of U.S.-based ways of organizing and naming homosexuality is irrefutable, I argue that transculturation provides the best theoretical mechanism for understanding the linguistic and cultural transformations in which gay men of Cuban descent participate.</p>
		
		<h3>Language Autonomy: Spanish in a U.S. Context</h3>
		<p>While Spanish had gained a measure of acceptance, if not dominance, in Miami since the 1990s, it is important to situate Spanish-language use in Miami in national and historical contexts. In the national context, the use of Spanish is a highly politicized issue, and the struggle for language autonomy has been a primary battleground for U.S. Latino communities. English Only legislation, antibilingual education initiatives, and informal stigmatization of the Spanish language have all been used throughout the country to veil anti-immigrant attitudes, limit the incorporation of Latino immigrants as citizens, and control their impact on what is envisioned as an otherwise unitary American culture. In various and sundry settings, new immigrants struggle to become fluent in a second (or third) language and are often humiliated and ignored if they speak accented or nonstandard English. Consequently, pan-ethnic Latino communities have mobilized for linguistic autonomy in support of bilingual education, against English Only legislation, and for the right to speak Spanish in the workplace and in schools.</p>
		<p>For Spanish-speaking Latinos living in the United States, political battles around language have been central to narrow and wide definitions of citizenship. In the narrowest sense, political conservatives have tried to make English-language proficiency a requirement of naturalized citizenship. In terms of the broader definition of cultural citizenship, Latinos have struggled for language rights in order to claim public space, defend the rights of people of diverse language backgrounds to make claims on the state, and limit the extent to which daily practices are circumscribed by imposed English use.<sup><a id="footnote_back5"></a><a href="#footnote5">5</a></sup></p>
		<p>Perhaps not surprisingly, during the same year as the Mariel boat-lift began&#x2014;a year of mass migration of predominantly non-English-speaking immigrants from Cuba and Haiti&#x2014;Miami became a battle ground over issues of immigration and language autonomy. In November 1980, voters in Dade County overwhelmingly passed an English Only initiative that &#x201C;made it unlawful to use county funds &#x2019;for the purpose of utilizing any language other than English, or promoting any culture other than that of the United States.&#x2019; &#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back6"></a><a href="#footnote6">6</a></sup> With the Mariel exodus so recent that entrants were still being held in resettlement camps, the success of the county-wide campaign signaled that non-Latino, non immigrant voters had reached the limits of their tolerance. In 1988, this sentiment was reinforced statewide when an English Only amendment to the state constitution was passed by 84 percent of Florida&#x2019;s voters.<sup><a id="footnote_back7"></a><a href="#footnote7">7</a></sup></p>
		<p>English Only became the battleground on which Dade County and Florida residents who considered themselves rightful citizens asserted what they believed was their exclusive claim to political rights, social services, and government funding. Perhaps more profoundly, these so-called natives asserted their claim to the cultural core of the city through the English Only battle. Their political mobilization in favor of English Only attempted to ensure that the language (and ethnicity) of the city would continue to be English-and Anglo-dominant.</p>
		<p>Although Miami&#x2019;s English Only proponents won several battles in the 1980s, by 2000 it was clear that the language war was lost. In May 1993, the Dade County commission overturned the 1980 English Only initiative. Consequently, signs at government buildings in Miami&#x2013;Dade County are now posted in English and Spanish as well as Haitian Creole. The worst fears of the English Only proponents have been met. In vast swaths of Greater Miami, one can conduct bank transactions, buy groceries, make travel arrangements, learn about government services, and see a doctor all without ever speaking English.</p>
		<p>Several factors contribute to the prevalence of Spanish use throughout Miami. The unique (and relatively privileged) history of the region&#x2019;s Cuban Americans is one significant factor. The continued entry of immigrants from Latin America and the Caribbean coupled with decreasing populations of black and white non-Hispanics have also intensified the Hispanicization of the city. As business interests from throughout Latin America continue to house operations in Miami, Spanish becomes more and more entrenched not only as a language of social interaction but as the language of business.</p>
		<p>I place my discussion of the globalization of gay culture within the contexts of battles over language autonomy, Miami&#x2019;s citywide ethnic makeup, and the rights of immigrants to shape local culture. Today, Spanish is a language with great currency in Miami&#x2019;s heteronormative settings <span class="italic">and </span>Miami&#x2019;s gay worlds. Put another way, English is definitely not the only gay language in Miami. In gay social settings catering specifically to Latino audiences, Spanish is both the language of social interaction and the language of performance. In gay clubs that do not cater specifically to Latinos and whose clientele includes mostly a mix of Anglos and Latinos, which I refer to as mainstream gay clubs, it is common to hear Spanish being used by patrons and, on occasion, by featured drag performers. Bilingualism and language autonomy are facts of life in gay circles in Miami.</p>
		
		<h3>Sexual Systems, Language, and Culture</h3>
		<p>Citing the absence of studies of Latino gay men in the United States, Tom&#225;s Almaguer employs ethnographic accounts of male same-sex behavior in Latin America to explain the Latin American sex system that he, in turn, uses to analyze the U.S. Latino gay experience. Although Almaguer also uses Chicana lesbian feminist writings (particularly those of Cherr&#xED;e Moraga) to discuss the socioeconomic position of Chicanos with regard to homosexuality and relationship to family, it is his reading of the Latin American sex system that has been taken up most often by scholars of the Latino gay experience. Almaguer contrasts how meanings of gender and sexual practices are organized in the &#x201C;Mexican/Latin American sexual system&#x201D; with how those meanings are organized in the United States. He argues that whereas sexual object choice is the primary determinant of one&#x2019;s sexual identity in the United States&#x2014;where a man who chooses to have sex with another man is defined as gay or homosexual, while a man who desires to have sex with a woman is defined as straight&#x2014;in Latin America, sexual aim (the desire to penetrate or be penetrated) forms the primary determinant of identity. According to the Latin American system Almaguer describes, the penetrated partner&#x2014;referred to by terms such as <span class="italic">pasivo, maric6n, mariposa, </span>or <span class="italic">loca</span>&#x2014;is much more stigmatized than the active/penetrating man.<sup><a id="footnote_back8"></a><a href="#footnote8">8</a></sup> According to this system, a man who penetrates another man, sometimes referred to as a <span class="italic">bugarr6n, </span>is barely, if at all, stigmatized. According to this typology, <span class="italic">pasivos </span>will not desire each other sexually, nor will <span class="italic">activos. </span>Rather, the feminine <span class="italic">(pasivo) </span>will seek out the masculine <span class="italic">(activo), </span>and vice versa.</p>
		<p>These binaristic sexual roles are assumed to correspond to socially visible gendered manifestations. In other words, in most Latin American social contexts, men exhibiting characteristics socially associated with women or socially defined as effeminate are assumed to be members of the socially marked category of <span class="italic">maricones </span>and assumed to be passive. On the other hand, men who appear masculine are less likely to be accused of being a <span class="italic">maric6n, </span>more often assumed to be an <span class="italic">activo, </span>and less likely to be stigmatized as homosexual&#x2014;even if they have sex with men. Some describe the European American sexual system where all men who desire other men are defined as homosexual and are not differentiated in terms of their sexual roles as more egalitarian than the Latin American sex system.</p>
		<p>One premise of the literature on the Latin American sex/gender system is that because sex and gender are organized differently in Latin America than in the United States, we cannot simply translate U.S. English-language categories (like gay) to understand Latin American cultural categories. In what follows, I explore how these sexual taxonomies can inform our interpretation of men&#x2019;s linguistic strategies in a multiethnic U.S. urban context.</p>
		<p>In chapter 7, I revisit this typology and discuss some of the ways in which Almaguer&#x2019;s argument has been extended, complicated, and critiqued. For the purposes of this chapter, this generalized typology helps clarify the complicated intersections of different sex/gender systems and the languages we use to discuss them.</p>
		
		<h3>Transculturation</h3>
		<p>A Cuban-born man who has sex with men and has been raised primarily to think of himself in terms of an <span class="italic">activo/pasivo </span>dichotomy does not simply bring a static system of meanings, pleasures, desires, and languages with him when he immigrates to the United States. Rather, these systems of meanings are transformed by new experiences during that man&#x2019;s life. In what ways does a U.S.-born Cuban American gay man&#x2014;raised with the values of a Latin American sex/gender system, educated in U.S. schools, and offered unrestrained access to U.S. mass media and gay clubs and culture&#x2014;understand his own sexual identity? What languages might he use to make sense of his own desires and identifications?</p>
		<p>I argue that the concept of transculturation best explains these men&#x2019;s experiences. Developed by the Cuban anthropologist Fernando Ortiz, the term <span class="italic">transculturation </span>was meant to supplant the use of <span class="italic">acculturation, </span>a term gaining prominence among U.S. sociologists who analyzed the white immigrant experience in urban settings.<sup><a id="footnote_back9"></a><a href="#footnote9">9</a></sup> For Ortiz, the term <span class="italic">acculturation </span>emphasizes the acquisition of the dominant culture. He reminds us that this acquisition necessarily implies the loss of the culture of the home country, a process he labels <span class="italic">deculturation. </span>For Ortiz, the concept of transculturation involves both acculturation and deculturation as well as neoculturation&#x2014;the creation of a new culture that maintains elements of the two meeting cultures but in the end is quite different from both.</p>
		<p>When applying the concept of transculturation to gay culture, Ortiz&#x2019;s theory suggests that immigrants (like the Brazilian gay men Parker discusses) do not simply assimilate into a static U.S. gay culture and adopt its language, symbols, and sexual systems. Rather, U.S. gay culture is itself changed by extensive contact with immigrant, non-English-speaking homosexual men and women.<sup><a id="footnote_back10"></a><a href="#footnote10">10</a></sup> The theory of transculturation also speaks to the importance of the culture of Cuban male homosexuals. Because of the racial, economic, and political power that Cuban Americans hold in Miami (relative to other racial/ethnic groups), multiple spaces exist for the development of Cuban cultural projects&#x2014;so long as they do not contradict an anti-Castro agenda. Allowed at least a marginal space for development, a hybrid that draws on the experiences of first-and second-generation Cuban American gay men, a Cuban American gay neoculture has flourished. This neoculture holds traces of both Cuban and U.S. histories and represents a new formation made possible only at a specific historical conjuncture.</p>
		<p>These processes of gay transculturation are evident in the language and meaning systems of Cuban American gay men. In this chapter, I focus on three linguistic practices that illustrate gay transculturation. The first is Cuban American gay men&#x2019;s use of the term <span class="italic">gay </span>in both Spanish-and English-language accounts to describe their own sexuality and communities. Although the adoption of this terminology sometimes implies an adoption of a U.S.-based sex/gender system, gay as linguistic marker can also coincide with a gendered sexual identity associated with Latin American sexual structures. I argue that linguistic and cultural markers that suggest a reliance on U.S.-based gay culture are invested with divergent meanings by gay men of Cuban descent and must be interpreted within a bicultural framework. The second practice is the use of Cuban Spanish gay argot in Miami&#x2019;s predominantly Latino gay club settings and, occasionally, in more ethnically mixed gay settings. Use of expressions like <span class="italic">perra </span>and <span class="italic">loca </span>reflect both the maintenance of Cuban male same-sex cultures and the incorporation of these linguistic traditions by second-generation Cuban American gay men. The third practice is linguistic innovation that involves a mixture of Spanish and English. Such innovation, I contend, reflects and creates an ethnic, bilingual, bicultural gay culture. The term <span class="italic">p&#225;jaration </span>is but one humorous linguistic invention that joins Cuban Spanish and U.S. English and marks the bilingual listener as an insider to Cuban American gay male hybrid culture.<sup><a id="footnote_back11"></a><a href="#footnote11">11</a></sup></p>
		
		<h3>Linguistic Practice 1: Redefining What &#x201C;Gay&#x201D; Means</h3>
		<p>Homosexual men of Cuban descent often use the term <span class="italic">gay, </span>pronounced in English and Spanish <span class="italic">(gai) </span>within the contexts of both English-and Spanish-language conversations. In my interviews, I found that men used the word <span class="italic">gay </span>to identify themselves, the communities around them, and even same-sex practices in Cuba. In Spanish-language accounts, gay was used both as an adjective, as in <span class="italic">el mundo gay </span>(the gay world), <span class="italic">la vida gay </span>(gay life), and <span class="italic">un lugar gay </span>(a gay place), and as a noun, as in <span class="italic">los gay </span>(the gays) and <span class="italic">un gay cubano </span>(a gay Cuban). In these accounts, gay was sometimes used interchangeably with <span class="italic">homosexual.</span><sup><a id="footnote_back12"></a><a href="#footnote12">12</a></sup></p>
		<p>Since the term <span class="italic">gay </span>is associated with a U.S.-based sex/gender system that can be contrasted with a Latin American sex/gender system, it might be assumed that the use of the term coincides with an adoption of U.S. sex/gender categories and meanings. In other words, we might conclude that those men who use the term <span class="italic">gay </span>in Spanish-language accounts refer to all men who have sex with men within the context of a nongendered notion of male homosexuality. However, this is not necessarily the case. Although the adoption of this terminology sometimes implies an adoption of a U.S.-based sex/gender system, gay as linguistic marker can also coincide with a gendered sexual identity associated with Latin American sexual categories.</p>
		<p>The two following examples illustrate how men of Cuban descent invest the term <span class="italic">gay </span>with different meanings. Armando, the forty-seven-year-old man who came to the United States in 1980 whom I discuss in chapter 1, used a heavy mix of English and Spanish throughout our interview. He used the term <span class="italic">gay </span>within the context of both English and Spanish phrases and sentences. His definition of the term closely coincided with a U.S.-based system of meaning. In the following interview excerpt, I asked Armando whom he included in his category of gay.</p>
		
		<div class="poetry">
		<p class="noIndent">SUSANA PE&#xd1;A: &#xbf;Por ejemplo, un hombre que tiene sexo con hombres pero que no se identifica como gay, [qu&#xE9;] es?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">ARMANDO: Para m&#xED; ese es un <span class="italic">closet case.</span>
		</p>
		<p class="noIndent">SP: &#xbf;Entonces s&#xED; es gay?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">A: Ese es un <span class="italic">closet case, but he&#x2019;s still gay.</span>
		</p>
		<p class="noIndent">SP: Okay.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">A: Pero hay muchos, como te dec&#xED;a, <span class="italic">old gay or the old school </span>que tienen que tener un hombre, un hombre que inclusive est&#xE9; casado y tenga hijos. Que yo siempre he dicho, bueno, si el hombre est&#225; casado y tiene hijos pero se acuesta con otro hombre <span class="italic">there&#x2019;s something weird there, </span>pero a la misma vez, es esa cosa latina. Yo me imagino que tit habr&#225;s encontrado eso mucho. Que hay ciertos hombres que est&#225;n casados, tienen hijos, se acuestan con gays, pero ellos son hombres y tit no. Y entonces pues eso es lo que a m&#xED; me molesta. El hecho de imaginarme que yo estoy teniendo una relaci&#xf3;n sexual con un hombre que piensa que es un hombre y yo no. Yo soy un hombre tambi&#xE9;n, un hombre a quien le gustan los hombres pero soy un hombre, no soy una mujer, ni soy menos que tit, ni soy ninguna otra cosa. . . . Ese es el tipo de relaci&#xf3;n que a m&#xED; no me, nunca me ha convencido. . . . Como se dec&#xED;a en los tiempos antiguos, <span class="italic">and this is a bad word, I&#x2019;m sorry I have to use it, </span>bugarrones. Ese tipo de relaci&#xf3;n yo no la entiendo, nunca la he entendido, nunca la he tenido, no me interesa.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">SUSANA PE&#xd1;A: For example, a man who has sex with a man but doesn&#x2019;t identify as gay is?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">ARMANDO: To me, he&#x2019;s a closet case.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">SP: Then, he is gay?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">A: He&#x2019;s a closet case, but he&#x2019;s still gay.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">SP: Okay.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">A: But there&#x2019;s a lot, like I was telling you, old gay or the old school who have to have a man, even a man who&#x2019;s married and has kids. And I always said, if he&#x2019;s married and has kids but he sleeps with another man, there&#x2019;s something weird there, but at the same time, it&#x2019;s a Latin thing. I imagine you&#x2019;ve come across that a lot. That there&#x2019;s certain men who are married, have kids, they sleep with gay men, but they are men and you are not. Well then that is what bothers me. Having to imagine that I&#x2019;m having sex with a man who thinks that he is a man but I&#x2019;m not. I&#x2019;m a man too, a man who likes men, but I am a man, I&#x2019;m not a woman, and I&#x2019;m not less than you, or anything else. . . . I&#x2019;ve never been convinced by that type of relationship. . . . As I was saying, in the old times, and this is a bad word, I&#x2019;m sorry I have to use it, <span class="italic">bugarrones. </span>I don&#x2019;t understand, I&#x2019;ve never understood, never had, and never been interested in that kind of relationship.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p class="extraIndent">In this account, Armando used the term <span class="italic">gay </span>to refer to all men who have sex with men regardless of their gender identity and preferred sexual role. Such is the meaning of gay in the U.S. sexual system, but Armando superimposed this definition, with which he identified, onto men who identify according to the Latin American sex system as <span class="italic">activos </span>or <span class="italic">bugarrones. </span>Armando clearly described the U.S. sex system in which all men who desire men are equally gay as more egalitarian than a Latin American sex/gender system that would define him as &#x201C;not a man&#x201D; and therefore inferior to a &#x201C;real man.&#x201D; He unequivocally distanced himself from this type of meaning system.</p>
		<p>Ren&#xE9;, a fifty-one-year-old Cuban man who left Cuba in the 1970s, also used the term <span class="italic">gay. </span>During the interview he spoke almost exclusively in Spanish and used the term <span class="italic">gay </span>often, even to refer to life in Cuba. How ever, his definition of gay was quite different from Armando&#x2019;s:</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>A m&#xED; no me gusta la gente gay en el sentido que me gustan los hombres, que es el tipo de gente que t&#xfa;, que yo encontraba en Cuba, y que yo disfrutaba en Cuba. . . . Entonces es muy dif&#xED;cil para una gente como yo porque la gente gay no me, no me llama la atenci&#xf3;n.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">I don&#x2019;t like gay people in the sense that I like men. That&#x2019;s the type of person that you, that I used to find and that I enjoyed in Cuba. . . . So it&#x2019;s very hard for someone like me because for me gay people aren&#x2019;t, I&#x2019;m not attracted to gay people.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p class="extraIndent">Although Ren&#xE9;, like Armando, used the term <span class="italic">gay </span>within his Spanish-language account, he seems to be using gay as almost an equivalent to <span class="italic">pasivo, </span>the passive category in the Latin American sex system, in the sense that his &#x201C;gay&#x201D; refers to nonmasculine men who have sex with men, in contrast with &#x201C;real men&#x201D; who have sex with men. Since terms like <span class="italic">maric&#xf3;n, p&#225;jaro, </span>and <span class="italic">joto </span>are all highly stigmatized terms in Latin American countries, the term <span class="italic">gay </span>has the advantage of not carrying with it this history of stigma. Therefore, when used in this account, gay refers to a category in the Latin American sex/gender system without embodying the same stigma as <span class="italic">maric&#xf3;n.</span>
		</p>
		<p>Both Armando and Ren&#xE9; use the same term, <span class="italic">gai, </span>in the context of Spanish-language accounts. By using a bicultural framework to interpret their narratives, it is clear that this same term actually refers to different categories of people. I discuss the use of the term <span class="italic">gay </span>as metaphor for the varied incorporation of U.S. gay culture and gay English by U.S. residents who are not predominantly English speakers. This analysis of the term <span class="italic">gay </span>suggests that non-Anglo and non-English-speaking homosexual men in the United States do not simply adopt U.S. meaning structures. Rather, they sometimes redefine gay English and U.S. gay culture or infuse it with other ways of understanding and organizing same-sex desires. Additionally, this example also illustrates that Cuban first-generation immigrant men do not all make cultural negotiations in the same way. In the example above, Armando and Ren&#xE9;, both Cuban-born men living in the United States, use the English-language category gay in contrasting ways and also position their own sexual/gender identity in very different relationships to U.S. and Cuban sexual categories. What Ren&#xE9; finds desirable and exciting is precisely what Armando describes as demeaning and disempowering.</p>
		
		<h3>Linguistic Practice 2: Using Cuban Gay Slang</h3>
		<p>The use of Spanish is common throughout Miami. The use of Cuban Spanish gay slang constitutes a more specific practice that marks the speaker as not only Spanish-speaking but also particularly Cuban or Caribbean <span class="italic">and </span>gay. During my fieldwork, &#x201C;perra&#x201D; was one of the most widely used Cuban gay expressions I encountered. Literally, <span class="italic">perra </span>means female dog in Spanish, but within the Cuban gay context, it is used as a term of praise whose meaning is similar to that of fierce in African American gay male communities.<sup><a id="footnote_back13"></a><a href="#footnote13">13</a></sup> Exclamations of <span class="italic">&#x201C;&#xa1;perra!&#x201D; </span>are used to laud a particularly decadent drag queen or even a female singer identified as a gay icon. The first issue of <span class="italic">Perra!, </span>a Spanish-language gay zine published in Miami in 1995 and marketed to Latino gay men, explains that &#x201C;perra es en nuestro espa&#xf1;ol caribe&#xf1;o, una palabra de exaltaci&#xf3;n para todo aquello que sea fabuloso o extravagante. Puede ser perra alguien, una voz, un vestido, un peinado, una canci&#xf3;n, un show, un logro, una frase&#x201D; (<span class="italic">perra </span>is in our Caribbean Spanish, an exclamation of praise for all that is fabulous and extravagant. Someone, a voice, a dress, a hairstyle, a song, a show, an achievement, a phrase can be <span class="italic">perra</span>).<sup><a id="footnote_back14"></a><a href="#footnote14">14</a></sup> The use of this simple exclamation as the zine&#x2019;s title implies the language of its content, the sexuality of its readers, and the predominantly Cuban slant of its materials.</p>
		<p>
			<span class="italic">Perra </span>is used widely in predominantly Latino gay settings, but I have also heard it used by Latino men at predominantly Anglo gay settings and predominantly heterosexual Latino settings. It is a particularly Hispanic Caribbean exclamation that marks the speaker as gay or at least as having a gay sensibility. In addition, <span class="italic">perra </span>is grounded in Cuban gay kitsch, requiring evaluative skills that draw on a knowledge of gay Cuban icons and expressions. In other words, the speaker needs to be able to evaluate a particular performance or outfit in the context of a Cuban gay sensibility in order to evaluate whether it is <span class="italic">perra. </span>While the term is extensively used in Cuban Miami, it constitutes one small example of how Cuban gay language is maintained and transmitted in Miami.</p>
		<p>In some cases, the men I interviewed felt that expressions grounded in Cuban gay language and culture more closely captured their experience than English-language expressions. Ren&#xE9; offered a good example. When I asked him about his coming-out experiences, he rejected the concept of coming out, labeling it as something &#x201C;raro&#x201D; (strange and/or unusual).<sup><a id="footnote_back15"></a><a href="#footnote15">15</a></sup></p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>Cuando una persona es mariquita es mariquita. T&#xfa; sabes, no necesita <span class="italic">coming out, coming out </span>es algo muy raro. Yo por ejemplo lo s&#xE9; desde que tengo siete, o tres, cuatro a&#xf1;os. Yo sab&#xED;a que ese era mi destino, que yo ten&#xED;a que enfrentarme a eso en alg&#xfa;n momento. O sea, yo podr&#xED;a decir que sal&#xED; del closet a los trece a&#xf1;os, porque me acept&#xE9; que me iba a acostar con un hombre y fui a buscarlo. Pero, yo eso ya lo sab&#xED;a.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">When somebody is a <span class="italic">mariquita, </span>they&#x2019;re a <span class="italic">mariquita. </span>You know, they don&#x2019;t need to come out. Coming out is a really strange thing. For example, I knew since I was seven or three, four years old. I knew that that was my destiny, that I had to face up to that at some point. So, I could say that I came out of the closet when I was thirteen years old because I accepted that I was going to sleep with a man and went to look for him. But I already knew that.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p class="extraIndent">
			<span class="italic">Mariquita </span>is a term used to refer to effeminate gay men. It is related to the term <span class="italic">maric&#xf3;n, </span>but <span class="italic">mariquita </span>has a diminutive and feminine-gendered suffix. According to Ren&#xE9;, the concept of coming out is &#x201C;strange&#x201D; because one&#x2019;s queerness is undeniable from a young age. In this account, male homosexuality is naturalized to the extent that it is seen an inborn trait that is, or should be, obvious to others. For Ren&#xE9;, coming out becomes something of an anticlimactic moment, since it is assumed that those around you can see that you are a <span class="italic">mariquita.</span>
		</p>
		<p>Instead of the concept of coming out of the closet, Ren&#xE9; proposes that we talk about &#x201C;cantar &#x2019;La Bayamesa.&#x2019; &#x201D; This insider expression is not necessarily recognized by nonhomosexuals. &#x201C;La Bayamesa&#x201D; is one of several names for the prerevolutionary Cuban national anthem. It therefore can be literally translated as &#x201C;singing the national anthem.&#x201D; The expression, therefore, plays off of themes of patriotism and valiant masculinity.</p>
		
		<div class="blockquote">
		<p>[&#xC9;l] canta &#x201C;La Bayamesa.&#x201D; Significa aceptarse. . . . En Cuba, cantar &#x201C;La Bayamesa&#x201D; era un individuo que se acostaba con alguien y que no se escond&#xED;a.</p>
		<p class="noIndent spaceAbove">[He] sings &#x201C;La Bayamesa.&#x201D; It means to accept oneself. . . . In Cuba, someone who sang &#x201C;La Bayamesa&#x201D; was someone who slept with someone and didn&#x2019;t hide.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p class="extraIndent">Whereas the concept of coming out emphasizes the declaration of your sexual preference to others, &#x201C;cantar &#x2019;La Bayamesa&#x2019; &#x201D; as defined by Ren&#xE9; primarily emphasizes self-acceptance and <span class="italic">not hiding </span>one&#x2019;s sexual preference. Likewise, Ren&#xE9; emphasized when he himself came to terms with his preference for male sexual partners, rather than having proffered any kind of declaration about his sexual preference to others. Similarly, Carlos Decena argues that the Dominican immigrant gay men in his study understood their sexuality as a tacit subject, &#x201C;something understood, yet not stated.&#x201D; He argues that coming out might &#x201C;sometimes be redundant,&#x201D; for it is a &#x201C;verbal declaration of something that is already understood or assumed&#x2014;tacit&#x2014;in an exchange.&#x201D;<sup><a id="footnote_back16"></a><a href="#footnote16">16</a></sup> The objective difference between the terms coming out and &#x201C;cantar &#x2019;La Bayamesa&#x2019; &#x201D; is not the key issue. We might argue that Ren&#xE9;&#x2019;s explanation of &#x201C;cantar &#x2019;La Bayamesa&#x2019; &#x201D; strongly overlaps with some understandings of coming out. However, for Ren&#xE9;, these two expressions, an English one drawing on U.S. metaphors and a Spanish one drawing on Cuban metaphors, are distinct. One makes more sense to him and has more relevance to what he identifies as the critical moments of his development as a homosexual man.</p>
		<p>The use of Cuban gay expressions and slang is also common among second-generation Cuban American gay men who predominantly speak English. They are among those who yell <span class="italic">&#x201C;&#xa1;perra!&#x201D; </span>at drag shows and who sometimes greet their friends at gay clubs with a smattering of Cuban gay slang. Learning and using Cuban gay slang by mostly English-speaking Cuban American gay men marks a transmission of Cuban gay sensibility from one generation to the next. It connects young, second-generation Cuban American gay men with a strand of Cuban culture that celebrates male homosexual expression. For example, Luis, the Miami-born man in his twenties who discussed his childhood distance from the Mariel <span class="italic">locas </span>in the chapter 3, also described the significance of his relationship with two older Cuban gay men as &#x201C;a door to a cultural awakening.&#x201D; When he described what he learned from them, he focused mostly on language and gay icons: &#x201C;There was a whole language. . . . I think in most gay cultures there&#x2019;s a, you know, languages that are, if not specific to them at least typical of them at the time and I enjoyed listening to the gay, the older gay Cuban language &#x2019;cause it was new to me at the time.&#x201D; Luis eagerly listened to these two older men. He described being intrigued by the content of their conversations: gay life in Cuba, the iconography of female artists in Cuban gay culture, drag history, and webs of gossip weaved about the sexuality of celebrities. Luis also described being intrigued by the language itself (&#x201C;the older gay Cuban language&#x201D;): the slang, the expressions, the intonation, and the pacing of their words provided Luis with a sense of how the Spanish language was used in the context of a gay culture. In a sense, Cuban gay expressions taught Luis how to be gay in Spanish.</p>
		<p>Luis spoke about his relationship with these two older Cuban gay men on another occasion. I specifically asked him if he felt he had to struggle to be both gay and Cuban.<sup><a id="footnote_back17"></a><a href="#footnote17">17</a></sup> He responded:</p>
		
		<div class="poetry">
		<p class="noIndent">Luis: No because I&#x2019;ve been exposed to a long history of culture that&#x2019;s both.</p>
		<p class="noIndent">SUSANA PE&#xd1;A: Through your friends?</p>
		<p class="noIndent">L: Through older gay Cuban friends. I&#x2019;ve been aware that there&#x2019;s been a culture there that existed, that has existed forever. The two things to me aren&#x2019;t mutually exclusive. I think, maybe it&#x2019;s not, while not all the things that are gay about Cuban culture can be easily pinpointed as specifically gay, but maybe there&#x2019;s common trends in things that gay people talked about, people gay people admire. . . . I guess there&#x2019;s traditionally been a gay sensibility that people have, that exists, not that necessarily everybody shares in but, through things like theater and literature and the arts that makes up, like, a gay culture.</p>
		</div>
		
		<p class="extraIndent">The transmission of Cuban gay culture is an important element of second-generation Cuban American gay men&#x2019;s ethnic identity. As I discuss in the next chapter, learning Cuban gay slang and tapping into a rich history of Cuban gay sensibility and icons provide a view of Cuban culture that celebrates male homosexuality and facilitates the creation of integrated Cuban and gay identities.</p>
		
		<h3>Linguistic Practice 3: Bilingual Linguistic Innovations</h3>
		<p>Linguistic innovations that involve a mixture of Spanish and English reflect and create an ethnic and bilingual gay culture. I look to drag performances to illustrate this hybrid language, but these linguistic innovations emerge from a lived context of life in a multilingual city where bilingual neologisms occur often as mistakes. These various kinds of plays on language can be a source of embarrassment and humor, but they can also become the dominant mode of expression. Often they capture Miami&#x2019;s multicultural reality in an utterance. This is true for heterosexual and homosexual speakers of English, Spanish, and Spanglish, but in the case of Cuban American gay men, these linguistic innovations can create a particular insider standpoint: that of a biculturally gay man.</p>
		<p>This creation of an insider position is most obvious and easily observed in drag settings. Drag performances in predominantly gay settings provide a good place to observe both the linguistic innovations of Cuban American drag queens and the audience reception and reaction to these innovations. Drag queens often use linguistic mistakes as the basis of stand-up routines and drag humor. The audience members who get the joke are privileged as insiders. In my research, I found that exchanges that occur in drag settings, especially those between drag queens and audience members, form one important site where Cuban gay culture is created and reinvented.</p>
		<p>I draw the title of this chapter from one such drag performance. <span class="italic">P&#225;jaration </span>is a linguistic innovation used by the <span class="italic">trasvesti </span>performer Mariloly, a Cuban drag queen popular in Latino gay clubs and often featured in local Spanish-language television shows. Mariloly does a series of stand-up routines that play off of her &#x201C;Cuban, can&#x2019;t speak English&#x201D; character. Mariloly&#x2019;s emcee acts and performances occur predominantly in Spanish, but she incorporates bilingual elements in ways that highlight the humor of the new immigrant experience. In one typical routine, Mariloly speaks to the audience in Spanish and then tries to speak in English to a monolingual club manager who is imagined to be offstage. As she fumbles through her translation for the manager, she tries to come up with a word to describe the characteristics of the audience to the imagined English speaker. She says, &#x201C;Here, here,&#x201D; pronounced in a thick Cuban accent and points to the audience members around her. Not finding the right word, she asks herself (as many Spanish speakers do when they cannot come up with the appropriate word in English), &#x201C;Ay, &#xbf;C&#xf3;mo se dice?&#x201D; (Oh, how do you say that? or What&#x2019;s the word?). Then, as many Latinos have done before her, she proceeds to make up a word, using a Spanish-language base word and an English-language suffix. &#x201C;Here, mucho p&#225;jaration. You understand?&#x201D;</p>
		<p>&#x201C;P&#225;jaration&#x201D; is pronounced in a thick Cuban accent (pa-ha-RAY-shon). The linguistic innovation plays off of the Spanish-language derogatory slang for gay men, <span class="italic">p&#225;jaros, </span>which literally translates to birds. <span class="italic">P&#225;jaro </span>is used to denote a homosexual man, most likely an effeminate gay man.<sup><a id="footnote_back18"></a><a href="#footnote18">18</a></sup> The term <span class="italic">p&#225;jaration </span>joins the derogatory <span class="italic">p&#225;jaro </span>with &#x201C;-ation,&#x201D; a form of the English-language suffix &#x201C;-tion&#x201D; that denotes the noun form of a condition or state of being.</p>
		<p>I saw this skit performed several times, and every time the crowd erupted with laughter when Mariloly said &#x201C;p&#225;jaration.&#x201D; The joke and its instant crowd response mark the bicultural audience members as insiders. To get the joke, you must know the Spanish noun <span class="italic">p&#225;jaro, </span>know the English suffix &#x201C;-tion,&#x201D; and recognize the incongruence of combining the two.</p>
		<p>This stand-up routine also allows the Latino audience to laugh at the mistakes of an un-Americanized immigrant. However, since this joking occurs in the context of a Spanish-language routine, the assumed listener is more likely to be a person who himself has been in a similar situation.<sup><a id="footnote_back19"></a><a href="#footnote19">19</a></sup> Within this context, what is devalued most is the monolingual English speaker who would not be able to understand the majority of Mariloly&#x2019;s routine and would most likely not get the joke about <span class="italic">p&#225;jaration. </span>Given the fact that this performance occurred in a club catering to Latino gay men, I interpret this poking fun at the immigrant experience as an in-joke, understood best by those who have either experienced it themselves or who have seen close relatives in similar situations.</p>
		<p>The use of linguistic innovation in this example points to common experiences that characterize Cuban American life in Miami and emerges out of an intersection between Cuban gay Spanish and English. In terms of my larger ethnographic study of Cuban American gay male culture, <span class="italic">p&#225;jaration </span>as linguistic innovation stands in for all the times men throw together seemingly incongruous elements to create a fusion culture.</p>
		
		<h3>Conclusion</h3>
		<p>In their daily use of languages, people infuse known words with new meanings, make up new words, and use particular expressions frequently while completely ignoring others within their vocabulary. In this chapter, I have examined how language can create a bridge between older and younger, Cuban-born and U.S.-born Cuban American gay men invoking cultural signifiers that are necessarily transformed in their journey. I have explored how Cuban American gay men categorize and systematize desires and identities with language and how assumed linguistic categories do not necessarily correspond to a given system of complex meanings. New expressions emerge in particular multicultural urban settings to reflect a bicultural gay reality. In other words, Cuban gay culture and U.S.-based gay culture transform each other.</p>
		<p>Each linguistic practice discussed provides insight into transculturation. Men of Cuban descent invest the term <span class="italic">gay </span>(along with other cultural symbols of the U.S. gay movement such as freedom rings and pink triangles) with a range of meanings. We cannot assume when we hear a Cuban American man say he is gay that he means quite the same thing as does an Anglo man in the United States. Analyses of the effects of U.S. gay culture on cultures of same-sex activity throughout the globe have to take into account this process of meaning-investment. Al though we cannot ignore the cultural imperialism and economic power of U.S. values, we also cannot assume that the rest of the world passively accepts this power without resistance and transformation. In Miami transculturation is actively changing the meanings of identificatory terms such as <span class="italic">gay.</span>
		</p>
		<p>Young, second-generation Cuban American gay men who might have no direct contact with gay life in Cuba still routinely draw on Cuban gay expressions as a form of cultural exchange. Although this education process might be transformative for the young gay men I interviewed, in their new uses, expressions like <span class="italic">perra </span>are also transformed. When someone screams &#x201C;&#xa1;Perra!&#x201D; in a South Beach club to a leather-wrapped drag queen lip-synching to Grace Jones, it has a slightly different meaning than when <span class="italic">perra </span>is used in a Cuban housing project at <span class="italic">travestis </span>who have applied eyelashes with shoe glue and are lip-synching to a Sarita Montiel song, as seen in the documentary <span class="italic">Mariposas en el andamio (Butterflies on the Scaffold).</span><sup><a id="footnote_back20"></a><a href="#footnote20">20</a></sup> This change in meaning reflects a change in gay sensibilities and material realities. Although Cuban gay slang is more dominant in clubs that cater to a majority Latino population, it has also seeped into Miami&#x2019;s mainstream gay club and drag activities, particularly mainstream drag events that attract a strong Latino contingent. The presence of Spanish-language elements in mainstream gay locales may serve to make these settings less alienating to Latino gay men, especially Spanish speakers.</p>
		<p>And then there is <span class="italic">p&#225;jaration. </span>Cuban American character-oriented drag queens like Mariloly are extremely important social commentators. They have built a following precisely because they are able to document Cuban and Latino gay experiences. They draw from bicultural experiences and through humor are able to touch nerves of connection between different generations of Cuban American gay men. The culture that is both reflected in and created through performance and audience reception illustrates gay transculturation.</p>
		<p>My research suggests the importance of looking at languages other than English to understand gay cultures. We must be careful not to equate English (gay or otherwise) and U.S. gay cultures with liberation, egalitarianism, or freedom without also asking questions about how these languages and cultures are experienced by non-English-speaking, non-Anglo homosexual men. The struggles over language autonomy in Miami remind us that in the context of the United States, English-language use is imposed with a series of social, legal, and political strictures complexly intertwined with racism and anti-immigrant attitudes. In this context, the use and maintenance of Spanish and the development of Spanglish also embody elements of resistance, liberation, and freedom. The languages of gay expression and pleasure are increasingly plural and shifting.</p>
		<p>In the next chapter, I shift from a more narrow focus on language to a broader focus on cultural narratives about <span class="italic">cubanidad. </span>As I have argued so far, competing narratives of <span class="italic">cubanidad </span>circulated in Cuba, among Cuban exiles, and in the dominant U.S. media. These narratives both explicitly and implicitly identified the gendered and sexualized subjects allowed within the narrative nation. In the next chapter, I explore Cuban American gay men&#x2019;s relationship to those narratives.</p>
		
		<hr /><ol class="footnotes"><li id="footnote1"><p>Dennis Altman, &#x201C;Global Gaze/Global Gays,&#x201D; <span class="italic">GLQ </span>3, no. 4 (1997): 417&#x2013;36.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back1">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote2"><p>Richard Parker, <span class="italic">Beneath the Equator: Cultures of Desire, Male Homosexuality, and Emerging Gay Communities in Brazil </span>(New York: Routledge, 1999), 225.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back2">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote3"><p>Ibid., 226.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back3">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote4"><p>Spanglish describes a mix of Spanish and English. It can refer to constant code switching between English and Spanish or to specific terms that incorporate English- and Spanish- language elements.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back4">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote5"><p>For a discussion of the concept of Latino cultural citizenship, see Rina Benmayor and William V. Flores, <span class="italic">Latino Cultural Citizenship: Claiming Identity, Space, and Rights </span>(Boston: Beacon, 1997).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back5">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote6"><p>Alejandro Portes and Alex Stepick, <span class="italic">City on the Edge: The Transformation of Miami </span>(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 161, citing Frederic Tasker, &#x201C;Anti- Bilingualism Approved in Dade County,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Miami Herald, </span>November 5, 1980. This English Only legislation actually repealed an ordinance passed in 1973 by the county board, the Bilingual- Bicultural ordinance, which &#x201C;designated Spanish as the county&#x2019;s second official language and called for the establishment of a Department of Bilingual and Bicultural Affairs, the translation of county documents into Spanish, and increased efforts to recruit Latinos to county jobs&#x201D; (Garc&#xED;a, <span class="italic">Havana USA, </span>114, 74).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back6">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote7"><p>Portes and Stepick, <span class="italic">City on the Edge, </span>161.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back7">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote8"><p>Almaguer, &#x201C;Chicano Men,&#x201D; 75&#x2013;98. For literature on Mexico, see Joseph Carrier, <span class="italic">De los otros: Intimacy and Homosexuality among Mexican Men </span>(New York: Columbia University Press, 1995); Clark Louis Taylor, &#x201C;El ambiente: Male Homosexual Social Life in Mexico City&#x201D; (PhD diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1978); H&#xE9;ctor Carrillo, <span class="italic">The Night Is Young: Sexuality in Mexico in the Time of AIDS </span>(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002). On Nicaragua, see Roger N. Lancaster, <span class="italic">Life Is Hard: Machismo, Danger, and the Intimacy of Power in Nicaragua </span>(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992); Lancaster, &#x201C;Subject Honor and Object Shame: The Construction of Male Homosexuality and Stigma in Nicaragua,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Ethnology </span>27, no. 2 (1988): 371&#x2013;90. On Brazil, see Parker, <span class="italic">Beneath the Equator</span>; Richard G. Parker, <span class="italic">Bodies, Pleasures, and Passions: Sexual Culture in Contemporary Brazil </span>(Boston: Beacon, 1991). On Cuba, see Young, <span class="italic">Gays under the Cuban Revolution</span>; Leiner, <span class="italic">Sexual Politics in Cuba</span>; Lumsden, <span class="italic">Machos, Maricones, and Gays.</span></p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back8">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote9"><p>Fernando Ortiz, <span class="italic">Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar, </span>trans. Harriet de On&#xED;s (1940; repr. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1995), 97&#x2013;103. For another discussion of transculturation in relation to Miami&#x2019;s ethnic cultures, see Alex Stepick and others, <span class="italic">This Land Is Our Land: Immigrants and Power in Miami </span>(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 144&#x2013;45.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back9">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote10"><p>The effects of non- Anglos on U.S.- based gay culture may be seen in exoticizing discourses of desire such as the eroticization of Latino masculinity in gay circles. Transculturation does not necessarily guarantee liberatory results.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back10">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote11"><p>For other analyses of linguistic innovations involving humor in Latino communities, see Jose Lim&#xf3;n, &#x201C;Carne, Carnales, and the Carnivalesque: Bakhtinian, Batos, Disorder, and Narrative Discourses,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Situated Lives: Gender and Culture in Everyday Life, </span>ed. Louise Lamphere, Helena Ragon&#xE9;, and Patricia Zavella (New York: Routledge, 1997), 62&#x2013;82; Jose R. Reyna and Mar&#xED;a Herrera- Sobek, &#x201C;Jokelore, Cultural Differences, and Linguistic Dexterity: The Construction of Mexican Immigrant Chicano Humor,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Culture across Borders: Mexican Immigration and Popular Culture, </span>ed. David R. Maciel and Maria Herrera- Sobek (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1998), 203&#x2013;25.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back11">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote12"><p>For a discussion of the use of the term <span class="italic">gay </span>in Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s, see Stephen O. Murray and Manuel G. Arboleda, &#x201C;Stigma Relexification: &#x2018;Gay&#x2019; in Latin America,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Latin American Male Homosexualities, </span>ed. Stephen O. Murray (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1995), 138&#x2013;44.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back12">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote13"><p>This English- language translation provided by the editor of <span class="italic">Perra! </span>magazine (Eduardo Aparicio, interview with the author, January 21, 1999).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back13">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote14"><p><span class="italic">Perra! </span>May 1995, 1.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back14">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote15"><p>During interviews conducted in Spanish, I tried to use a variety of English and Spanish versions of the concept of coming out. In this interview, I specifically asked, &#x201C;&#xbf;Qu&#xE9; significa la expresi&#xf3;n <span class="italic">coming out </span>para t&#xED;? &#xbf;O &#x2018;salir del closet,&#x2019; [o] &#x2018;declararse&#x2019;?&#x201D;</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back15">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote16"><p>Decena, <span class="italic">Tacit Subjects, </span>18, 19.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back16">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote17"><p>Early research on gay and lesbian people of color living in the United States employed an identity- conflict model. Identity- conflict models assume that gay and lesbian people of color must balance competing demands from their ethnic/ racial and sexual communities and that their ethnic/racial and sexual identities are, therefore, experienced as split or in conflict. Scholars such as Oliva M. Esp&#xED;n and James T. Sears have asked respondents to rank their sexual and racial/ethnic identities. In my research, I chose to take a step back and ask respondents whether they felt their identity was in conflict (&#x201C;Do you feel you have to struggle to be both gay and Cuban?&#x201D;) (Esp&#xED;n, &#x201C;Issues of Identity in the Psychology of Latina Lesbians,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Lesbian Psychologies: Explorations and Challenges, </span>ed. Boston Lesbian Psychologies Collective [Urbana: University of Illinois, 1987], 35&#x2013;55; Sears, &#x201C;Black or Gay in a Southern Community: Jacob and the Bus Boycott,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Growing Up Gay in the South: Race, Gender, and the Journeys of the Spirit </span>[New York: Haworth, 1990], 117&#x2013;43). See also John L. Peterson, &#x201C;Black Men and Their Same-Sex Desires and Behaviors,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Gay Culture in America: Essays from the Field, </span>ed. Gilbert Herdt (Boston: Beacon, 1992), 147&#x2013;64; Edward S. Morales, &#x201C;HIV Infection and Hispanic Gay and Bisexual Men,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences </span>12, no. 2 (1990): 212&#x2013;22.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back17">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote18"><p>I found some evidence of the reclamation of derogatory terms such as <span class="italic">maric&#xf3;n </span>and <span class="italic">p&#225;jaro </span>by Cuban American gay men. This reclamation could be a fourth linguistic practice. &#x201C;P&#225;jaration&#x201D; can be seen as divesting <span class="italic">p&#225;jaro </span>of its negative power through humor. In a gay Latino club with Mariloly employing the term, the stigma- laden history of <span class="italic">p&#225;jaro </span>makes it funnier and inspires the crowd to heckle Mariloly. This, however, is a partial process, and the positive investment in these stigma- laden terms works only in particular settings.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back18">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote19"><p>I have purposely chosen to use the pronoun <span class="italic">himself. </span>The club where this performance was observed catered almost exclusively to men, and typically audiences were over 90 percent male.</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back19">back</a></p></li><li id="footnote20"><p><span class="italic">Mariposas en el andamio (Butterflies on the Scaffold) </span>(dir. Luis Felipe Bernaza and Margaret Gilpin; 1996).</p><p class="backLink"><a href="#footnote_back20">back</a></p></li></ol></div></body></html>