<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="ch02" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
      <h1 class="cn"><a id="p54" class="page"></a><a class="xref" href="baym-0007.xhtml#toc">2</a></h1>
      <h1 class="ct">Music as Commodity</h1>
      <p class="pf">Gary Waleik played guitar, sang, and wrote songs with the Boston-based band Big Dipper. Signed to a prestigious independent label in the late 1980s, they put out two records before being “upstreamed” to Sony. Their major label debut sold poorly. Sony dropped them. The band broke up. They found other careers in radio, in finance, in teaching. The bass player became a vintner. Nearly twenty years later they reunited to record a new album. In contrast to their first records, when the next steps seemed obvious, this time they didn’t know what they were supposed to do. Should they sign to a label? Release it themselves? Digital only? Vinyl?</p>
      <p>And what about Facebook and Twitter and all those other social media the younger musicians they knew insisted they needed? Waleik shakes his head: “You could see the progress from MySpace to Facebook to Twitter. Everyone just loses their minds at the latest thing, and says ‘No, this is how you do it.’ And there’s never any sort of consensus. I mean as corrupt and horrible as the old record industry was, at least it was a barely stable way to get the word out about music. I’m glad to see the record industry go, because it was so corrupt and awful and evil. But I kind of miss it in a way, you know?” The path in the 1980s had been difficult, and ultimately had not sustained them, but at least it made sense.</p>
      <p>Most musicians never earned livings through the recording industry, but for those who did, or who aspired to, the years since the recording industry’s 1999 crash have been confusing. In 1999, U.S. music sales peaked at $14.6 billion U.S. dollars. By 2010, sales had fallen by more than 40 percent,<a id="en146r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en146">1</a> reaching a low of $6.3 billion in 2009, before beginning to rise as digital music markets became well established. In response to dropping sales, the labels laid off nearly a quarter of their staff and slashed artist rosters. Although digital and (unexpectedly) vinyl revenues are now increasing, labels still struggle with the “unstable and <a id="p55" class="page"></a>out-of-control logic of their business.”<a id="en147r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en147">2</a> For musicians who might once have turned to record labels to help guide their path, the new terrain is ambiguous and constantly changing. Once-settled distinctions are gone. At every step in music’s value chain, from inception to audience experience, inexpensive digital platforms continue to undo “the hard categories which characterized the old, industrialized model of music-making and consumption.”<a id="en148r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en148">3</a> Record labels are less likely than ever to provide musicians with upfront financing, manufacturing, distribution, and publicity. Increasingly on their own, musicians are pushed toward social media in hopes that if they can just <i>connect</i> with their audiences, they might get by. This perceived need to be more social has created new anxiety. As Tim Anderson put it, “it was one thing to have no model to follow, it is another to have no goal.”<a id="en149r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en149">4</a></p>
      <p>Today’s upheaval seems remarkable, and it is, but it is far from the first time new technologies have upended the profession of music. Sensibilities about order and relationships have shifted before. Twentieth-century recording industries did a remarkable job of creating the sense that theirs was the natural order, but in fact they were a historical fluke resulting from a particular moment in which technologies favored highly centralized and industrialized systems of music production and distribution. As technologies change, dialectic dynamics that undergird artist-audience relationships change too. Technologies reshape the contextual pressures on the relationships and, in so doing, reshape the relationships themselves.</p>
      <p>In the last chapter we saw how music, from its prehistoric origins, has circulated as a gift that helps people have more “feelingful” and socially connected lives. Throughout history, new technologies have altered the extent to which music is social or commercial, immaterial or material, participatory or owned, decentralized or centralized. Every technological advance has brought new experiences of music and given rise to new social relationships. “Foremost among these changes,” writes Albrecht, “has been the unending drive towards commodification and the accompanying reduction of popular participation in the experience of music.”<a id="en150r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en150">5</a> Today’s musicians strive for participatory communal experiences based on emotion and social connection but are caught in market realities that define their relationship with audiences as producers making goods or providing services to customers. Their turn to social media as a solution <a id="p56" class="page"></a>to contemporary conditions is new, but in many ways echoes music’s pre- and early-commodified past. To understand it, we need both to denaturalize the immediate context of the recording industry that came before and show the continuities with what has long been at stake. This chapter traces how technological changes have altered the dynamic tensions of musicians’ environment, continuously pushing them toward new ways of getting by as music makers and, in so doing, toward different ways of relating to their audiences.</p>
      <h2 id="ah0201" class="ah">Inventing Musicians and Audiences</h2>
      <p class="paft">Until relatively recently in human existence, music was a participatory practice rather than something working musicians did for audiences at leisure. We don’t know just when that began to change. Art from ancient Egypt and Rome is rife with images of people playing musical instruments for royalty, so certainly by then some people were making livings providing soundtracks for others. There were wandering minstrels. Yet well into the eighteenth century, musical creativity was generally understood as belonging to a communal tradition or the divine, rather than to a musician who might be worthy of admiration or adoration.<a id="en151r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en151">6</a> Until around 1800, music in the West was practiced primarily “either as a private amateur pastime, made among friends and family, or as an elaborate public ritual, either in street parades or at church services.”<a id="en152r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en152">7</a> In these contexts, the concept of “audience” would have made little sense. That of “fan” did not exist. Participants in those private and public events may have loved music, “but its embeddedness in social functions made more likely that one loved that which the music enabled.”<a id="en153r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en153">8</a></p>
      <p>The “heroic discourse of individual genius”<a id="en154r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en154">9</a> that is often applied to musicians took centuries to develop. Musicologists locate early seeds of these transformations in the late twelfth century with the invention of musical notation.<a id="en155r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en155">10</a> Notation represented sound as ink on paper, separating music from its playing and fixing an intangible experience in material, lasting form. Furthermore, paper could be signed, making it possible to affix enduring individual identities to compositions. While indigenous cultures such as Native Americans of the Northwest coast had strong rules about which families had rights to perform certain songs, the signing of notation laid the groundwork for the idea, eventually<a id="p57" class="page"></a> inscribed in law, that music comes from the minds of specific individuals and is hence “intellectual” property. The invention of the printing press enabled the reproduction of sheet music, making music not just a property but a commodity that could be bought and sold on the open market. “Even the strolling bards of antiquity depended upon the kindness of strangers to help them along their way,” writes Robert Albrecht, but with printing, for the first time music became “a tangible, non-personal product that could be mass produced, mass distributed, and even mass marketed.”<a id="en156r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en156">11</a></p>
      <p>The professionalization of musicians started in earnest in the 1600s when the first public performances were staged, beginning with a 1637 opera in Vienna.<a id="en157r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en157">12</a> Shortly thereafter, similar events were produced in England, but with a twist. Those attending had to purchase a new invention: the “ticket.” Formal settings like concert halls were created just for musical events. Just a hundred years later, paying to hear music had become normal for those elites who could afford a night in the concert hall.<a id="en158r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en158">13</a> Many came to think of music as a thing you might listen to as much if not more than an experience you might create.<a id="en159r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en159">14</a></p>
      <p>The European leisure class of the period had plenty of time to learn to make music themselves. Many were excellent and enjoyed playing for one another in their homes. But to take money for it would have been beneath them. To be paid for performance was to demonstrate that you had lower social standing than those who listened.<a id="en160r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en160">15</a> For much of the early history of professional musicianship, musicians who took money were seen and treated as hired help. Pity the early-seventeenth-century professional violinist dramatized in Rose Tremain’s novel <i>Music and Silence</i>, living and performing, as musicians really did, in the basement of Copenhagen’s Rosenborg Castle, the sound carried from their musty, illness-inducing environs through the hidden pipes of the world’s first indoor sound system up to King Christian IV and his surprised and delighted guests in the marble ballroom floors above.<a id="en161r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en161">16</a> No one stayed after the ball to get autographs. “A good ‘professional’ musician in those days was thus a servant, essentially an asset of the better sort, perhaps comparable to a head gardener or a racehorse.”<a id="en162r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en162">17</a> Many great classical works were commissioned for specific occasions “as one might order a new coat or wig,” created by craftspeople plying a trade rather than artists exercising genius.<a id="en163r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en163">18</a></p>
      <p><a id="p58" class="page"></a>By the 1800s, there were established careers to be made performing public music. The new class of professionals had an incentive to limit their numbers and drew tight boundaries around those who counted as “musicians.” Positioning themselves as seasoned experts in contrast to hobbyists enabled a subset of music makers to corner the market on public performance by the early 1820s.<a id="en164r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en164">19</a> American musicians unionized to help one another find work, creating the American Federation of Musicians (AFM) by the 1840s. This union worked well for those allowed to join, as it controlled who had the right to play in urban venues throughout the country and helped place its members in those jobs. For those the AFM did not consider “musicians,” the consolidation of musicianship into a unionized profession was deeply exclusionary. Those in the newly invented category of “amateurs” were ineligible for membership. People who played what came to be known as “country music” couldn’t join until the AFM fell under legal and social scrutiny for suing to recoup lost wages of Cincinnati union musicians when the (ineligible) Grand Ole Opry performed there in 1949.<a id="en165r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en165">20</a> African Americans were not allowed to join the AFM, and so created their own union.<a id="en166r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en166">21</a> Women were also excluded. Until 1979 even singers were omitted,<a id="en167r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en167">22</a> further marginalizing women, for whom public singing remains more accepted than playing most instruments (consider the novelty of a female drummer). Getting all these people out of public music performance had the benefit of ensuring access to those gigs for the privileged elite who remained, and hence to whatever income they might bring, but it also changed the work of music. It was no longer enough to please one patron; you had to have an effect on listeners that they were willing to buy.<a id="en168r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en168">23</a> You were not just selling music, you were selling feelings. For those outside this system, the centralization of power made it even more essential that musicians connected with communities of listeners that could sustain them.</p>
      <h2 id="ah0202" class="ah">Industrialization</h2>
      <p class="paft">By the start of the twentieth century, music was big business.<a id="en169r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en169">24</a> Throughout the Western world, industrialization had separated work from play. The leisure market had expanded. Audiences were plentiful. People had money to spend. New transportation technologies made it easier than ever to get out and about to experience public entertainment. <a id="p59" class="page"></a>Professional musicians were everywhere, providing soundtracks for concerts, dances, and films, for shopping and dining. Employers hired musicians to create soothing and inspiring soundtracks on shop floors and in office buildings. In 1870, a mere sixteen thousand Americans listed their occupation as professional musician or music teacher. Fifty years later, ninety-two thousand did. In his detailed history of the AFM, James P. Kraft characterizes the music industry at the turn of the century as “diffused,” “labor-intensive,” and “artisanal.”<a id="en170r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en170">25</a> Every moment that called for music still called for the presence of musicians.</p>
      <p>Against this backdrop, one new technology posed a danger. The player piano had the horrifying potential to make music without anyone there to strike the keys. For the first time, a live musician was replaced by an object. By disseminating music without musicians, piano rolls obscured the human work and social relationships behind their creation. Music was thus transformed into a perfect example of the tangible, purchasable, seemingly labor-free “fetish object” of which Marx wrote. Indeed, this was the point.<a id="en171r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en171">26</a></p>
      <p>Player pianos posed a problem. But, in the decades after Thomas Edison first recorded “Mary Had a Little Lamb” onto foil cylinders in 1877, recording became a crisis. Film theaters had been one of musicians’ primary sources of employment. Every movie house employed an in-house orchestra to provide the films’ soundtracks. By 1934, just seven years after the first feature film with sound, <i>The Jazz Singer</i>, was released, “about twenty thousand theater musicians—perhaps a quarter of the nation’s professional instrumentalists and half of those who were fully employed—had lost their jobs.”<a id="en172r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en172">27</a> Furthermore, radio stations, which had hired live bands to perform in studio and provided a source of revenue for those locked out of the AFM, became increasingly connected, meaning that radio stations all over the country could get by with only one band. The crisis for music professionals was further compounded by the Great Depression, in which even record sales, which hit seventy-five million dollars in 1929, fell to six million dollars by 1933.<a id="en173r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en173">28</a></p>
      <p>As commercialized sound recording recovered, the value of musicians’ skills—and their unions’ collective bargaining power—diminished. The public then, as now, was loathe to understand musicians as laborers, thinking of them as “playing” music rather than working. A union representative from New York warned in 1937 that “the abuse <a id="p60" class="page"></a>and misuse of mechanical reproductions of music constitute a threat which may annihilate the profession.”<a id="en174r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en174">29</a> Adding insult to injury, the musicians playing on these new recordings were often more talented than local musicians. Imagine the plight of the local tenor, suddenly having to compete with Enrico Caruso, the first recording star, who released nearly three hundred records for Victor Records between 1902 and 1920. Imagine the bliss of the opera lover suddenly able to hear so much glorious music at home.</p>
      <p>Recordings furthered the distinctions between professional musicians and everyone else. In many, though not all, genres, music went from “a communal activity of music-making and concert attendance to an industrial mass product that is consumed privately,” creating “a strict dichotomy between music performers and music consumers.”<a id="en175r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en175">30</a> The opportunity to buy a mass-produced Victrola Talking Machine or to turn on the radio at home and listen to recordings of the world’s best changed how “most people thought about music and integrated it into their lives.”<a id="en176r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en176">31</a> Music making shifted even further toward music listening, as records made it possible for people to hear so many skilled musicians for the first time. With new standards for what constituted “good” music, adults grew more inhibited, afraid to sing or play before others.<a id="en177r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en177">32</a> Participatory music increasingly gave way to performative music.</p>
      <p>Some see the industrialization and commodification of music and accompanying reduction of participation in music making as a crime against humanity. In 1929 the American composer Gregory Mason decried that industrial ideologies were degrading musical culture, “shackling it to the logic of the market” and stripping it “of its potential as a means of transcendent human expression.”<a id="en178r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en178">33</a> “Our powers of making music for ourselves have been hijacked and the majority of people robbed of the musicality that is theirs by right of birth, while a few stars, and their handlers, grow rich and famous through selling us what we have been led to believe we lack,” cried Small.<a id="en179r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en179">34</a> Albrecht agreed, writing that “music making, which since Paleolithic times has been a cornerstone and building block of sociality, has largely been replaced by music consuming.”<a id="en180r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en180">35</a> The ethnomusicologist Charles Keil went further, warning that music “is our last and best source of participatory consciousness.”<a id="en181r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en181">36</a> Clearly staking an extreme position, Keil insists that music should never be recorded, let alone monetized: “Once you have come to <a id="p61" class="page"></a>the conclusion that music is in its very essence communal, spiritual, the opposite of private property and at its best a totally shared experience, like love, a number of strong and clear positions on ‘the music industry’ can be stated: There shouldn’t be a music industry. Music shouldn’t be written or mechanically reproduced and mass-mediated. Music should exist live, for the moment, in present time, and its makers should be rewarded with happiness and barterlike reciprocities.”<a id="en182r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en182">37</a> This position resonates with many of the points in the last chapter, but as the next chapter will show, it doesn’t do justice to audiences, who developed new kinds of participatory practices through music fandom. Nor does the idea that recording and mass mediation has diminished humanity do justice to the power of recorded music to offer transcendent experience.</p>
      <p>The more the mass industrialization of music lessened the likelihood that a listener and a musician might ever be in the same place, let alone meet, the more listeners were sold an image of musicians as personalities with whom they had a personal, if one-sided, connection.<a id="en183r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en183">38</a> Thomas Edison may once have said that he cared “nothing for the reputation of the artists, singers, or instrumentalists,” as it was not his company’s “intention to feature artists or sell the records by using the artist’s name,”<a id="en184r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en184">39</a> but Victor Records took a different approach. Beginning around 1916, Victor began using snapshot-style photos of performers such as Caruso at home to add “a new, more ‘personal’ dimension to performers’ public identities.”<a id="en185r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en185">40</a> Magazines like <i>Life</i> published photo spreads of Caruso as a family man, marketing his personality and lifestyle. Like the new public figure of the movie star, the recording artist became “a symbolic figure offered for our consumption, contemplation and identification,”<a id="en186r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en186">41</a> helping to set the stage for the intimacy they are expected to foster on social media today.</p>
      <p>The remote connections audiences came to feel through recordings were further fostered by improvements in music technologies and by the media. Recordings let people immerse themselves in the same sounds over and over again. Advances in microphones gave a new “advantage to the younger, small-voiced performers who learned how to work close to the microphone to get the desired feelings.”<a id="en187r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en187">42</a> Singers like Frank Sinatra were able to transform microphones’ metal and wires “into the perfumed ear of a woman who could now be whispered to rather than bellowed at.”<a id="en188r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en188">43</a> As a result, “countless anonymous listeners could cultivate<a id="p62" class="page"></a> relationships with performers that approximated real intimacy, knowing the rhythms of another human being’s breath, registering the grain of another’s voice in one’s own body, and perhaps experiencing genuine feelings of exaltation or ecstasy.”<a id="en189r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en189">44</a> Coming from the phonograph as disembodied voices, the performers who felt so near could also feel otherworldly. The transcendent spiritual feelings music has always evoked were easy to transfer from deity to performer. Even as musicians became people with whom audiences could identify, they became people to be admired and even worshipped. This sense of knowing celebrities we’ve never met has often been considered “parasocial”<a id="en190r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en190">45</a> and (usually erroneously) delusional because it is not mutual. Nonetheless, it is both real and powerful.<a id="en191r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en191">46</a></p>
      <p>Musicians of the mid-twentieth century were concerned with matters more practical than the dehumanizing conditions of industrial ideologies. Some people were becoming stars in this new industry, but in these growing economies of scale, “more and more musicians worried about their jobs and careers.”<a id="en192r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en192">47</a> In 1942, unionized musicians went on a recording strike, hoping to save their profession. In announcing the “recording ban,” the wily and persuasive president of the AFM, James Petrillo, insisted musicians would not be forced to “play at their own funeral.”<a id="en193r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en193">48</a> It worked about as well as the recording industry’s later efforts to save itself from networked computing by suing peer-to-peer file sharers. The ban lasted two years. Musicians got little sympathy from audiences who then, as now, were more concerned about their own easy access to music they liked than with the protection of musicians as a laboring class. Nor did they get support from the U.S. Congress, which held hearings to determine whether the ban harmed the war effort.</p>
      <p>Not all musicians were opposed to recording. For those locked out of old routes, new technologies offer new avenues toward careers. Recording offered a way forward for those excluded from AFM membership and the opportunities it offered. Early labels that released only music performed by black people, and marketed only to black audiences, may have been racist (for instance, in the 1920s all secular black music was categorized as “blues”),<a id="en194r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en194">49</a> but they got the music heard both within and outside of black communities. Technological advances and growth led to “an intense commodification of Indigenous African-American music forms”<a id="en195r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en195">50</a> that “often served to distribute the popular narratives of African-Americans<a id="p63" class="page"></a> beyond the limits of their insular communities.”<a id="en196r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en196">51</a> Nonetheless, recording remained a difficult career path, and only elite black musicians made it.</p>
      <p>By the time the dust settled on the AFM’s recording ban, recording had won. Professional musicianship changed from a career in which many, though never all who aspired, could make a respectable living through live performance into one in which an elite few did extremely well, a few more created middle-class lives, and most were unable to make ends meet. The musicians most able to adapt were talented, yes, but they were also the ones who lived in cities that became recording centers and were able to pick up and leave their families and homes to perform. Career musicians became expected “to work long, late hours and travel far distances for jobs, away from their family and loved ones.”<a id="en197r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en197">52</a> For audiences, there had never been more music available. For musicians, there had never been so few opportunities to play for pay or so much need for relational sacrifice. Kraft describes the first half of the twentieth century as devastating for working musicians. He voices pessimism about what this historical encounter with new technology portends for workers in other fields, worrying that these musicians’ experience “suggests that the benefits of new technology will be distributed unevenly, and more or less according to power relationships between the major groups affected by technology.”<a id="en198r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en198">53</a></p>
      <h2 id="ah0203" class="ah">The Major Labels</h2>
      <p class="paft">In the new “centralized,” “capital-intensive,” and “highly-mechanized”<a id="en199r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en199">54</a> industry of the second half of the twentieth century, only a handful of major players had the economic capital necessary to fund the production, distribution, and marketing of recorded music. These recording companies came to be synonymous with “the music industry,” and in particular the major rather than independent labels, in public discourse. Jonathan Sterne argues that this definition buys into the tactics of the recording industry by ignoring other important music industries such as instruments, concert halls, software, and computing.<a id="en200r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en200">55</a> That record labels were able to corner the definition of “music industry” speaks to how much cultural sway they have held. Their power has been based on music as intellectual property rather than shared experience, technology <a id="p64" class="page"></a>that contains and limits that intellectual property to material forms, and the prohibitive expense of transforming intellectual property into physical objects, marketing it and distributing it to retail outlets. Most musicians worked and continue to work outside the major labels, but these labels’ influence continues to set many terms of the regulatory and cultural grounds on which everyone works.</p>
      <p>Intellectual property markets are inherently speculative. It is impossible to know in advance what will sell.<a id="en201r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en201">56</a> Labels need to recoup their costs, which requires making good guesses about what audiences will like. The handful of record labels that dominated the early twentieth century, companies like Edison, RCA/Victor, Columbia, EMI, and CBS, found their solution in the star system pioneered in the sheet music businesses of New York’s Tin Pan Alley.<a id="en202r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en202">57</a> In this star system, staff songwriters churned out songs while those who employed them banked on the occasional big hit, much as today’s major labels hope for a Taylor Swift or Beyoncé to justify the expense of the many acts whose names you don’t recognize. The star system ensured that those with perceived potential to sell on a mass scale were those most likely to get financed, and that most would be discarded shortly thereafter when they did not sell as well as the labels wanted. As of the early 2000s, 80 percent of artists on major labels did not sell enough to earn royalties beyond their advances.<a id="en203r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en203">58</a> Record companies thus produce much more music than they end up promoting. They focus their marketing efforts on “a small number of superstar artists, thus further increasing the divide between the artist and the consumer [and] between the superstars and the smaller-scale merely local performer/artists, who may succeed in recording, but could never hope for wide distribution.”<a id="en204r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en204">59</a></p>
      <p>Music produced within industry is designed to sell and make money.<a id="en205r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en205">60</a> Recording industry logic assumes that anyone seeking a career in music seeks stardom. As an A&#x26;R person at a major label put it at a conference I attended (articulating Roger O’Donnell’s fear), “you either want to be Jay-Z or you’re a hobbyist.” He was wrong about aspirations, but it is true that the industry in which he works offers little place for musicians seeking sustainable careers between hobbies and celebrity. Whether early or late in their career, the “scene-based” artists with whom I spoke rarely sought fame or fortune, even those who had achieved it. Some, like Kristin Hersh, had been with major labels and no <a id="p65" class="page"></a>longer were. Many were releasing their work through independent labels or direct-to-fan through platforms like Bandcamp. They aspired to a predictable income that would allow them to feed their family, afford a home, and focus on their art. They sought a dedicated audience that would stick with them and grow over time. They were happy to diversify, so long as it was into other areas that interested them. They wanted to perform only where they could hold their heads high. They wanted to take an occasional vacation without feeling guilty. “I can’t imagine becoming a musician and thinking you’re going to make money,” Hersh laughed. “We felt lucky when we were working! That’s what the money was for, just to work.”</p>
      <p>Not surprisingly, given that they see most musicians as disposable risks, record labels have a bad reputation. When the British Phonograph Industry (BPI) launched its “Home Taping Is Killing Music” campaign in the early 1980s, picturing a cassette tape with a skull and crossbones, mockeries ran rampant. A popular bumper sticker used the image but read, “home taping is killing the music industry and it’s about time.” The punk band Dead Kennedys released a cassette in 1981 with one side featuring the EP, “In God We Trust, Inc.” The other side read “HOME TAPING IS KILLING RECORD INDUSTRY PROFITS! WE LEFT THIS SIDE BLANK SO YOU CAN HELP.” Public Enemy’s Chuck D once described major labels as “the biggest pirates.”<a id="en206r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en206">61</a> “Any artist who has been on a major label knows that the last thing they’re concerned about is the musician making a living,” Michael Timmins told me, explaining why Cowboy Junkies left RCA to create their own label. “The only thing I know for sure,” said Nacho Vegas, “is if some new band or new singer asked me for advice—I don’t like to give advice to anyone—but the only thing I’d say is ‘Don’t ever sign a contract.’”</p>
      <p>There is no question that record companies have exploited many musicians. As music journalist Greg Kot describes, labels “instituted payola, routinely manipulated shady contracts to take away publishing from songwriters, and engaged in questionable accounting practices to deny royalties from record sales to the vast majority of its artists.”<a id="en207r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en207">62</a> Many of these shady practices continue. A 2015 report on fairness and transparency from the Rethink Music initiative found that little of the fifteen billion dollars of 2014’s global recorded music revenue for sound recordings went to musicians as ongoing revenue. Labels have had little incentive<a id="p66" class="page"></a> to pay out royalties. Their accounting is famously opaque, making it easy for labels and publishers to keep recurring revenues after costs have been recouped. One might wonder how much the figure Stahl mentions, of “80 percent” of records that didn’t earn back advances, is inflated by underhanded book keeping.<a id="en208r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en208">63</a> Labels’ failure to pay musicians is further compounded by disorganized and dispersed rights databases. Artists have no way to know how their music is used or purchased, and are hence unable to seek compensation they may deserve. Many musicians understand that the advance is the only money they will see from recordings, even if they sell well.</p>
      <p>All this being said, labels nonetheless provide a crucial infrastructure for building professional careers in recorded music. Love them or hate them, without their investments and capacities, we would not have much of the music that soundtracks modern life. Labels may never have supported as many artists as wanted the support, but they took and continue to take large financial risks on those they sign. For those in whom they did invest, labels also took care of a great deal of the work. Adequate advances and support staff allow artists to be full-time music makers. Labels can provide teams of specialists who guide the music from development to production, distribute the music and fulfill orders, manage licensing, sort out international distribution, oversee promotion, get the music on the radio, take care of booking at times, finance tours, and so on. As labels sign fewer artists, fewer get access to those advances they might never have earned back or get help with any of this work. It is no wonder that most of the musicians I interviewed, even those who had left major label deals, believed labels were still needed, especially for those who did aspire to stardom.</p>
      <p>The recording industry worked its centralized magic to great effect right up until 1999 when, in a move that foreshadowed the global economic crisis, sales began to crash. This decline has been well documented in books like Kot’s <i>Ripped</i>, Patrik Wikström’s <i>The Music Industry</i>, Aram Sinnreich’s <i>The Piracy Crusade</i>, and Stephen Witt’s <i>How Music Got Free</i>. The standard, inadequate explanation that each of these books critiques goes something like this: When “pirates” began ripping and circulating mp3s online, outside the purview of authorized markets, people stopped buying records. Napster and other peer-to-peer file trading systems decimated sales. Labels and music publishers dropped <a id="p67" class="page"></a>the ball, losing valuable time as they tried to stop file sharing instead of developing new digital markets.</p>
      <p>This story accurately assesses the losses but is incomplete at best in assessing the causes. The worst of unauthorized online file sharing, it turns out, began in the industry’s own pressing plants.<a id="en209r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en209">64</a> Academic research into the connection between file sharing and sales is inconclusive at best, calling into doubt an easy cause-effect relationship between the two and at times finding that downloaders may also be the recording industry’s best-paying customers.<a id="en210r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en210">65</a> Furthermore, many factors beyond file sharing must shoulder blame for the changing climate for music sales. There was a global financial crisis. Local music scenes collapsed. People had less disposable income and more choices for how to spend what entertainment budget remained. New forms of entertainment like streaming on-demand video and gaming (the latter of which, importantly but rarely discussed, commissions and licenses a great deal of music) garnered the attention of the idle. Finally, despite their protests, the major labels remain extremely lucrative, grossing fifteen billion dollars in the United States in 2015.<a id="en211r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en211">66</a> As with the rest of the economy, one might ask whether the problem lies in the distribution rather than the presence of revenue. The International Federation of the Phonograph Industry (IFPI) complains that despite the first growth in music revenues in fifteen years, “the revenues, vital in funding future investment, are not being fairly returned to rights holders.”<a id="en212r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en212">67</a></p>
      <h2 id="ah0204" class="ah">The Shift to Digital</h2>
      <p class="paft">Personal computing, especially networked computing, has transformed music production, distribution, and consumption, eroding the technological and capital boundaries that separate professionals and amateurs and creating new opportunities. With far less investment than studio time with a producer and recording engineers would cost, aspiring and accomplished musicians alike can create complicated music using powerful software like Ableton Live on home computers. Home recordings can sound professional. You don’t even need other musicians. “All you’ve got to have now is an idea,” UB40’s Brian Travers waxes enthusiastically: “You don’t even have to have a band or a guitar. You can have it all in an application. I think we’re going to hear some incredible musicians. <a id="p68" class="page"></a>We’re going to hear the likes of Beethovens and Chopins and Mozarts again, because you no longer need to get all these other egomaniacs to play instruments and play the parts you want them to play, which they won’t do, and they insist on playing their own bits. We’re going to start seeing the rise of the solo composer again.” Musicians can use the same computers on which they compose and record to make what they create available for listening or for sale through cloud and streaming platforms, social networks, or other websites, either on their own or with the help of inexpensive third-party services. They can sell downloads directly to their audience. In the abstract, if not always in practice, there’s no more need for packing, physical shipments, or retail distribution.<a id="en213r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en213">68</a></p>
      <p>The result of pervasive recording is “a cultural economy of ubiquity,” as Spotify’s musician-in-residence D. A. Wallach put it. Mogwai’s Stuart Braithwaite marvels that “every single piece of music practically ever, you can find in five minutes and listen to and buy if you want to. It used to be, if you heard a song on the radio you had to go around to every record shop and maybe have to ask them to order one in to hear it again. If you said that to a sixteen-year-old kid now they’d think you were talking about the stone age!” No longer bound to objects or locations, music is nowhere and everywhere. It is encoded in bits that hide on our phones, in our computers, our cars, our pockets, in the air.</p>
      <p>With music and every other form of entertainment and distraction available all the time and everywhere, it’s considerably more difficult to get anyone to pay attention. Audiences, once easily reached through a manageable number of media outlets (if you were lucky enough to break through their gates), are now fragmented across a dizzying array of media for discovering, discussing, listening to, and purchasing music.<a id="en214r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en214">69</a> Artists can set up websites and profiles, post their music, tweet, update, share snapshots on photo-sharing sites, make videos, and do any number of other things to speak directly to their fans. Just as recording offered a way for those excluded from live performances by the AFM to find careers, scene-based musicians excluded from the recording industries may be able to parlay the skills they developed on their own into what hip-hop promoter Steven Wiz calls the “digital hustle.” But without major financial investments in publicity or an audience already gathered, it is extremely challenging to get audiences to notice. And with any <a id="p69" class="page"></a>song available anytime, anywhere, it is hard to get people to pay for what they can find for free.</p>
      <p>Like musicians of the early twentieth century, suddenly faced with recording, people seeking to commodify their music must figure out new ways to turn their labor into income. There are more opportunities, but there is more work to be done and little money to pay people to do it. “You have to look at it like a full-time job,” the manager Ariel Rivas insists, “not just a one-hour performance job, in a club. When you leave the show, the rest of the day you need to work like you have a full-time job. The artist’s state of mind needs to be very concentrated and focused on developing his career. He needs to dedicate time. Every day.”</p>
      <p>Pulling off a professional career making music demands an array of nonmusical interests and skills in business, technology, and, most of all, relationship building, that many musicians and other long-time actors in the music industries neither have nor want. Just as the early years of recorded music shifted to favor some musicians over others for reasons that were as much about location, race, sex, mobility, and marketability as they were about talent, passion, or work ethic, these new technological contexts favor people with some sets of nonmusical skills, not others. Musicians must be “omniprofessional” entrepreneurs able to perform a wide range of jobs themselves.<a id="en215r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en215">70</a></p>
      <p>“The flipside to this integration of new and social media into the production process,” writes Jeremy Wade Morris, “is a greater burden on artists to take control of aspects of their career that they previously delegated to labels, managers, or other ancillary staff.”<a id="en216r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en216">71</a> The artists with the best odds are creative about business as well as music and are willing to take risks. They are the ones who know how to hustle. “All of the artists on my roster have had managers before,” the manager Emily White told me, but those managers were not open to artists’ ideas, often shooting them down. In contrast, “when they come to me with ideas, my response is, ‘Hell yes, let’s try this, let’s figure it out. It’s an experiment, and if it doesn’t work, we won’t do it again, or we’ll tweak it and try a different strategy.’” An approach like this is “exciting for somebody like me and the younger artists,” but she concedes, “it’s frustrating for people too, who just want to make their music.” Pearl Jam’s Eddie Vedder is hardly the only artist who would describe himself as able to “work on a bridge <a id="p70" class="page"></a>part of a song for three weeks,” but unable “to imagine listening to anything about the business ideas of what we do for more than an hour without taking a hammer to my head.”<a id="en217r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en217">72</a></p>
      <p>It’s also helpful to have technical skills. Those who want to make their own music need literacy in production software. They need to understand a vast array of potential distribution channels and make decisions about how best to get their music out there. They need to know how to create and manage websites and social media platforms. Honeychild Coleman’s experience with MySpace is not unusual: “when I first joined, I made my artist page first, but then I couldn’t figure out how to get back in it to update it, and then I lost everything. So then a couple years went by, and I made another page, and then I realized, ‘Oh, that artist page is still there, and I need to update it. And it’s old, and people are going to both.’”</p>
      <p>When we spoke she was in the process of trying to move her musical identity from her personal Facebook page to her Facebook fan page. “This is another job. I don’t have time for this. It’s so much work, it’s incredible.” “If I have fifteen minutes,” asks American jazz singer and guitarist Kate Schutt, “am I going to read some fucking, excuse my French, but fucking small print about Facebook, you know, who can view this and that and try and figure it out in my brain or would I rather practice my guitar and become a better musician? I would rather practice my guitar and become a better musician.” Schutt is very engaged with her audiences, but prefers postal mail. She’s had an ongoing “game” called “Mail Me 1 Thing” in which she invites audiences to mail her one thing and in return she will send them one back. Her “Postcard Project” invites people to send her a postcard, which she too will reciprocate in time. But from Schutt’s point of view, the sense of needing to use social media comes from fear rather than thoughtfulness: “The collapse of the music industry has sort of caused this knee-jerk reaction in a lot of musicians. It’s like, ‘Oh my God, I got to Twitter!’ ‘Oh my God, I got to Facebook!’ And they think all these things. ‘I got to be on twenty-seven sites, I got to have my music on every single site.’ But nobody stops to think, ‘do I really need to do that?’” She raises good questions.</p>
      <p>There is nothing intrinsic to business or technical skills that requires they be wielded by the musicians themselves. But only musicians can do the relationship building they need to sustain their careers, even if only <a id="p71" class="page"></a>to build a relationship with someone they can hire to build relationships on their behalf. Zoë Keating explains that “it’s really all about relationships: I have relationships in all of these different areas that allow me to have this career. I’m sort of good at making those relationships and making those connections and making things happen. If you’re not very good at that, you need to have a manager who can manage those relationships for you or who has the relationships on their own. And if you want to become, I think, a big artist who’s doing a more pop sphere, you need a team of people who has all of those.” In my interviews, musicians described working relationships with (among others) other musicians, managers, publicists, sales teams, engineers, producers, crew, contact people, booking agents, publishers, distributors, lawyers, promoters, and journalists. Often equally important in doing the work that needed doing were friends, spouses, nannies, and parents.</p>
      <p>More important than ever before are fans. Both musicians and labels now value social capital over record sales, capital “that allowed them to better license themselves, sell merchandise, bring crowds to concerts, and, perhaps, sell records and downloads.”<a id="en218r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en218">73</a> To get this capital, “artists and acts have had to experiment with opening themselves and their work online so that users could make them topics around which connections could be formed. The proposition to the fan is that an act’s online presence, the work, and the activities can be used as a source through which community can be formed and explored.”<a id="en219r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en219">74</a> If fans can be reached, they can be essential allies in providing publicity and, as chapter 4 will show, they may also take on tasks like website design and maintenance and tour planning that artists might otherwise have to pay for or go without. To cultivate the relationships needed in a creative career, musicians need “considerable personal and organisational resources.”<a id="en220r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en220">75</a></p>
      <p>Social media are crucial to this new work of relationship building, even if individuals need not use many of the available platforms. Rivas explains that even those with major label contracts need to be extroverts who build their social networks and keep in touch with their audiences:</p>
      <blockquote>
        <p class="bqs">You need to work like you don’t have anybody other than you. If you forget that and say, “Oh, I signed with a record label, they do everything,” that’s not true. The record label can’t invest millions, and millions, and millions. If you don’t move from your house, and you don’t stay in touch <a id="p72" class="page"></a>with your friends, and you don’t want to do the interviews, or you don’t want to be in your social network to develop it, it’s very difficult. If I knew a new artist had the opportunity to sign with a record label, I’d say, “Don’t forget that you need to be in touch with your niche, with your fans, with the people.” And if you don’t have the opportunity to sign, just do the same.</p>
      </blockquote>
      <p class="pcon">The internet and social media are often posited as a solution, but many of the musicians I spoke with weren’t sure that the social connections they were being urged to build, rewarding as they may be in their own right, actually lead to increased revenue. Michael Timmins puts a great deal of effort into the Cowboy Junkies website, but “whether it’s equated with making money, I don’t know. It’s hard to say. I mean, money comes in, but if I was to add up the hours, how much am I making per hour? I don’t know. But it’s definitely worth it for the communication side of it.”</p>
      <p>The singer-songwriter Erin McKeown sees herself as having two different careers, one online, where the questions are “how do you communicate with those fans? and what do you do for them? and how do you cultivate that interaction?” and a second in the concert venue, where the questions are “do you give a good live show and when are you coming to this city?” Artists with more followers, more likes, and other evidence that they can rally attention may have an easier time getting opportunities like gigs and recording contracts. I’ve spoken with managers who tell me that artists they work with get considerably more engagement and ensuing revenue when they post to social media themselves than when they let the management team do it. But there have been no economic studies to examine whether building and maintaining relationships with audiences through social media really results in making more money for most, let alone all, artists. The success of artists like Adele, who eschews social media entirely, and the low sales and revenue that have accrued to countless musicians who do use social media regularly, suggest that, at best, the connection between relational labor done through social media and income is complicated.</p>
      <p>David Lowery, of Camper Van Beethoven and Cracker, reminisces that when his bands began, either they were getting publicity or they weren’t. “Now that you can get publicity in a social media way, there’s always work to do.” When I spoke with Braithwaite, Mogwai were in the <a id="p73" class="page"></a>process of “hiring a company to manage our online presence, because the sheer workload is getting to be overwhelming. Things like collecting email addresses and managing the list are too labour intensive.” On top of the call to come up with fresh content and to monitor messages sent to you across platforms, there are friend requests to be approved, spam to be deleted, hackers to be vanquished, terms of service updates to be read, new sites that maybe you are supposed to use. Like housework, there is always more to be done and more you could have done. The feminist labor scholars Soile Veijola and Eeva Jokinen argue that since the 1970s, more work has come to resemble domestic work in that it requires “practical management of boundless and endless, never-finished, mostly immaterial tasks and chores” that intermingle and overlap in time and space.<a id="en221r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en221">76</a> The social relationships of new work “have started to resemble affective and communicative relations usually connected with home.” As one musician described it, keeping up with the daily social media demands of his job is “like doing dishes.”</p>
      <h2 id="ah0205" class="ah">New Music Worlds</h2>
      <p class="paft">In his classic <i>Art Worlds</i>, sociologist Howard Becker shows how many roles are implicated in the creation of art, ranging from the person considered the artist to those who make the paintbrushes to those who curate collections.<a id="en222r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en222">77</a> His point was that the idea of “artist” as a lone genius is absurd. One cannot create “art” without a web of interconnected people, each serving an essential role that makes it possible and shapes its meanings. Now, as has happened before, upended by technological change, previously distinct roles in musical art worlds have broken down. Artists can, at least in the abstract, fulfill any role themselves. But to do it all, let alone do it all well, pushes the boundaries of human capabilities.</p>
      <p>The support structures that have shaped and constrained musicians’ professional careers have shifted throughout history as technologies have reshaped music’s possibilities. Conditions have been more hospitable for some kinds of musicians at different times. With each technological innovation—sheet music, printing, the player piano, recording, the internet—music’s form, flow, and ability to be contained and owned have been changed. So too have musicians’ relationship with audiences. <a id="p74" class="page"></a>Musicians have gone from community members to hired help to expert professionals to inaccessible objects of identification and adoration and now back to something both distant and close.</p>
      <p>The next chapter will show how, during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, when musicians were pushed away from audiences through mass mediation, audiences went on to build participatory cultures of their own around music, creating networks and practices that are now ideally suited to help musicians, if—and this is a big “if”—artists can get fans to feel connected and mobilize that sense of connection effectively. We can see this new call for musicians to connect with audiences as a return to a time before recording and broadcast technologies took so many musicians out of local contexts and away from their audiences. We can see it as an extension of historic marginalized music scenes, such as black communities’ Chitlin Circuit, the Jewish Borscht Belt, and salsa musicians’ Cuchifrito Circuit.<a id="en223r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en223">78</a> But this is also a new phase in the history of music, one in which boundaries between community and star, creator and fan, professional and amateur, public and private, and home and work demand to be redrawn.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>