<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="acknow" class="chapter" epub:type="acknowledgments">
      <h1 class="ctbm"><a id="p205" class="page"></a><a class="xref" href="baym-0007.xhtml#toc">Acknowledgments</a></h1>
      <p class="pf">This book would not exist without the musicians I interviewed. I have never loved working with any material as much as I have loved working with their words. I hope more than anything that I’ve done their diverse perspectives justice. Any royalties I earn from this book will go directly to the Future of Music Coalition and CASH Music in the hopes of paying forward a little bit of the generosity you have shown me.</p>
      <p>I didn’t realize until late in the writing how much this book began when I was a teenager. Thanks to my old friends who appear explicitly or in the background of chapter 3, especially my compatriots in record store hijinks and fandom. Helen and Jamie, I so wish you were still here.</p>
      <p>I wrote this book at Microsoft Research New England where members of our Social Media Collective, especially Mary Gray and Tarleton Gillespie, were ideal partners in thought, as were Andrea Alarcon, danah boyd, Sarah Brayne, Kate Crawford, Kevin Driscoll, Megan Finn, Sharon Gillette, Dan Greene, Sarah Hamid, Rebecca Hoffman, Jessa Lingel, Kate Miltner, Dylan Mulvin, Steve Schirra, Lana Swartz, and all the people who have visited to share their work and listened to me talk through mine. Thanks also to Jennifer Chayes and Christian Borgs, and everyone who helps make MSRNE such an extraordinary environment.</p>
      <p>Many people helped by introducing me to people I interviewed, pointing me to relevant scholarship and offering feedback, conversation, and opportunities to develop the work further. Our SMC research assistants were invaluable. Thank you John Agnello, Lucy Bennett, Georgina Born, André Brock, Jean Burgess, Klaus Bruhn Jensen, Melissa Click, Jean Cook, Paul Dalen, Paul Dourish, Andrew Dubber, Wendy Fonarow, Jeff Hall, David Hesmondhalgh, Kylie Jarrett, Henry Jenkins, Marj Kibby, Mike King, Steve Lawson, Sonia Livingstone, Annette Markham, Alice Marwick, Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, Jeremy Meyers, Sharif Mowlabocus, Gina Neff, Susanna Paasonen, Ben Parr, Andrea Press, Virginie Sautter, Nick Seaver, Aram Sinnreich, Jonathan Sterne, T. L. Taylor, Kristin<a id="p206" class="page"></a> Thomson, Katrin Tiidenberg, Trond Tornes, Siva Vaidhyanathan, Anjali Vats, Sarah Banet Weiser, and Emily White.</p>
      <p>Thank you, Joel Orff, for illustrating my R.E.M. story and letting me reproduce it here, to Per Ole Hagen for the Sivert Høyem photo (and Anja Nyland Hagen for gifting it to me), and to all the photographers and fans who generously made their work available for reproduction here through Creative Commons licenses. I am sorry I couldn’t reach you all to tell you.</p>
      <p>Thanks to those whose music has been my soundtrack during the years I’ve worked on this. You gave me constant opportunities to reflect on what I was writing and made my life more abundantly feelingful. Sivert and Nacho, your songs move me every time. Feelies, you are my grounding wire. Others played on repeat include Arctic Monkeys, Club 8, Courtney Barnett, Iggy Pop, Jenny Wilson, Kitchie Kitchie Ki Me O, Lorde, Madrugada, Peter Bjorn and John, Queens of the Stone Age, R.E.M., Röyksopp, Teleman, the Fine Arts Showcase, and Woodkid. Robert and Gustaf, I will always miss the songs you never got to write.</p>
      <p>Thanks to everyone who cheered me on as I worked.</p>
      <p>And thanks to you for the reading and responding that will give this book life.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>