<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="structure" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
      <div class="epigraph">
        <p class="epf"><a id="pv" class="page"></a>“In the past bands could disappear for four years and live in a mansion somewhere, and people were just happy when they did come down from their Ivory Tower and release a record and allow you to go and buy it. Now I think that it’s important that you engage with your listeners all the time.”</p>
        <p class="ept">—Roger O’Donnell, The Cure</p>
        <p class="epf">“You can’t just show up and be a rock star and not put the effort into showing your fans you care anymore. Before you were able to just be a rock star, be aloof, be a drug addict, go on tour and it was cool. You were cooler for it. Now you have to put in a lot of work to keep them interested.”</p>
        <p class="ept">—Sydney Wayser, singer-songwriter</p>
        <p class="epf">“Now people expect you to reply to them. They expect you to respond to their tweets. It’s not like ‘Oh My God! She actually wrote back!’ It’s like ‘of course you wrote back.’”</p>
        <p class="ept">—Zoë Keating, cellist and composer</p>
        <p class="epf">“In the old days pop stars, rock stars used to just drop out of the sky, didn’t they? And now, they’re tweeting about what they had for breakfast or, you know, whatever. Interesting days though. It’s one of those things I suppose people are still trying to find out. Where to draw the boundaries and what works and what doesn’t, you know?”</p>
        <p class="ept">—Mark Kelly, Marillion</p>
      </div>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>