<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="refs" class="chapter" epub:type="backmatter">
      <h1 class="ctbm"><a id="p225" class="page"></a><a class="xref" href="baym-0007.xhtml#toc">References</a></h1>
      <div class="references">
        <p class="rf">Abidin, Crystal. “‘Aren’t These Just Young, Rich Women Doing Vain Things Online?’: Influencer Selfies as Subversive Frivolity.” <i>Social Media + Society</i> 2, no. 2 (April–June 2016): 1–17. doi:10.1177/2056305116641342.</p>
        <p class="rf">Adkins, Lisa. “Cultural Feminization: ‘Money, Sex and Power’ for Women.” <i>Signs</i> 26, no. 3 (2001): 669–95.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “The New Economy, Property and Personhood.” <i>Theory, Culture and Society</i> 22, no. 1 (February 1, 2005): 111–30. doi:10.1177/0263276405048437.</p>
        <p class="rf">Adkins, Lisa, and Celia Lury. “The Labour of Identity: Performing Identities, Performing Economies.” <i>Economy and Society</i> 28, no. 4 (November 1, 1999): 598–614. doi:10.1080/03085149900000020.</p>
        <p class="rf">Adkins, Lisa, and Eeva Jokinen. “Introduction: Gender, Living and Labour in the Fourth Shift.” <i>NORA-Nordic Journal of Feminist and Gender Research</i> 16, no. 3 (September 1, 2008): 138–49. doi:10.1080/08038740802300947.</p>
        <p class="rf">Albrecht, Robert. <i>Mediating the Muse: A Communications Approach to Music, Media and Cultural Change</i>. Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press, 2004.</p>
        <p class="rf">Anderson, Tim J. <i>Popular Music in a Digital Music Economy: Problems and Practices for an Emerging Service Industry</i>. New York: Routledge, 2014.</p>
        <p class="rf">Ang, Ien. <i>Desperately Seeking the Audience</i>. London: Routledge, 1991.</p>
        <p class="rf">Aronson, Jane, and Sheila M. Neysmith. “You’re Not Just in There to Do the Work: Depersonalizing Policies and the Exploitation of Home Care Workers’ Labor.” Gender and Society 10, no. 1 (February 1996): 59–77.</p>
        <p class="rf">Attali, Jacques. <i>Noise: The Political Economy of Music</i>. Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985.</p>
        <p class="rf">Auslander, Philip. “Against Ontology: Making Distinctions between the Live and the Mediatized.” <i>Performance Research</i> 2, no. 3 (January 1, 1997): 50–55.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Musical Personae.” <i>TDR: The Drama Review</i> 50, no. 1 (April 20, 2006): 100–119.</p>
        <p class="rf">Badhwar, Neera K. “Friendship and Commercial Societies.” <i>Politics, Philosophy and Economics</i> 7, no. 3 (August 1, 2008): 301–26. doi:10.1177/1470594X08092105.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bakhtin, Mikhail M. <i>Speech Genres and Other Late Essays</i>. 2nd ed. Edited by Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Translated by Vern W. McGee. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bandcamp. “What Pricing Performs Best?” <i>Bandcamp</i>. https://bandcamp.com. Accessed January 23, 2017.</p>
        <p class="rf">Banet-Weiser, Sarah. <i>AuthenticTM: The Politics of Ambivalence in a Brand Culture</i>. New York: New York University Press, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p226" class="page"></a>Barreto, Manuela da Costa, Michelle K. Ryan, and Michael T. Schmitt, eds. <i>The Glass Ceiling in the 21st Century: Understanding Barriers to Gender Equality</i>. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, 2009.</p>
        <p class="rf">Baulch, Emma. “Gesturing Elsewhere: The Identity Politics of the Balinese Death/Thrash Metal Scene.” <i>Popular Music</i> 22, no. 2 (May 2003): 195–215.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bauman, Richard. <i>Verbal Art as Performance</i>. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland, 1984.</p>
        <p class="rf">Baxter, Leslie A. <i>Voicing Relationships: A Dialogic Perspective</i>. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">Baxter, Leslie A., and Barbara M. Montgomery. <i>Relating: Dialogues and Dialectics</i>. New York: Guilford Press, 1996.</p>
        <p class="rf">Baym, Nancy K. “Data Not Seen: The Uses and Shortcomings of Social Media Metrics.” <i>First Monday</i> 18, no. 10 (September 29, 2013). doi:10.5210/fm.v18i10.4873.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “The New Shape of Online Community: The Example of Swedish Independent Music Fandom.” <i>First Monday</i> 12, no. 8 (August 6, 2007). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1978.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Personal Connections in the Digital Age</i>. Cambridge: Polity, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community</i>. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE, 1999.</p>
        <p class="rf">Baym, Nancy K., and Robert Burnett. “Amateur Experts International Fan Labour in Swedish Independent Music.” <i>International Journal of Cultural Studies</i> 12, no. 5 (September 1, 2009): 433–49. doi:10.1177/1367877909337857.</p>
        <p class="rf">Becker, Dana, and Jeanne Marecek. “Positive Psychology History in the Remaking?” <i>Theory and Psychology</i> 18, no. 5 (October 1, 2008): 591–604. doi:10.1177/0959354308093397.</p>
        <p class="rf">Becker, Howard S. <i>Art Worlds</i>. 25th anniversary ed., updated and expanded ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008.</p>
        <p class="rf">Beebe, Steven A., Susan J. Beebe, and Mark V. Redmond. <i>Interpersonal Communication: Relating to Others</i>. 6th ed. Boston: Pearson, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bellous, Joyce. “Five Classroom Activities for Sustaining a Spiritual Environment.” <i>International Journal of Children’s Spirituality</i> 11, no. 1 (April 1, 2006): 99–111. doi:10.1080/13644360500504389.</p>
        <p class="rf">Beniger, James R. <i>The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bennett, Lucy. “Delegitimizing Strategic Power: Normative Identity and Governance in Online R.E.M. Fandom.” <i>Transformative Works and Cultures</i> 7 (July 16, 2011). http://journal.transformativeworks.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Discourses of Order and Rationality: Drooling REM Fans as ‘Matter Out of Place.’” <i>Continuum</i> 27, no. 2 (2013): 214–27.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Music Fandom Online: REM Fans in Pursuit of the Ultimate First Listen.” <i>New Media and Society</i> 14, no. 5 (2012): 748–63.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Thinking Fan’s Rock Band: REM Fandom and Negotiations of Normativity in Murmurs.com.” Cardiff University, 2009. http://orca.cf.ac.uk.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p227" class="page"></a>Bergquist, Magnus, and Jan Ljungberg. “The Power of Gifts: Organizing Social Relationships in Open Source Communities.” <i>Information Systems Journal</i> 11, no. 4 (October 1, 2001): 305–20. doi:10.1046/j.1365–2575.2001.00111.x.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bermejo, Fernando. <i>The Internet Audience: Constitution and Measurement</i>. New York: Peter Lang, 2007.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bigelow, Brian J., and John J. La Gaipa. “The Development of Friendship Values and Choice.” In <i>Friendship and Social Relations in Children</i>, edited by Hugh C. Foot, Anthony J. Chapman, and J. R. Smith, 15–44. New York: John Wiley, 1980.</p>
        <p class="rf">Blau, Peter M. <i>Exchange and Power in Social Life</i>. New York: John Wiley, 1964.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bolter, Jay David, and Richard Grusin. <i>Remediation: Understanding New Media</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bolton, S. C. “The Lady Vanishes: Women’s Work and Affective Labour.” <i>International Journal of Work Organisation and Emotion</i> 3, no. 1 (2009): 72–80. doi:10.1504/IJWOE.2009.025400.</p>
        <p class="rf">Booth, Paul. <i>Playing Fans: Negotiating Fandom and Media in the Digital Age</i>. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">Born, Georgina. “On Musical Mediation: Ontology, Technology and Creativity.” <i>Twentieth-Century Music</i> 2, no. 1 (March 2005): 7–36. doi:10.1017/S147857220500023X.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bourdieu, Pierre. <i>Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste</i>. London: Routledge, 1986.</p>
        <p class="rf">Boyd, Jenny. <i>Musicians in Tune: 75 Contemporary Musicians Discuss the Creative Process</i>. New York: Fireside, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Brownstein, Carrie. <i>Hunger Makes Me a Modern Girl: A Memoir</i>. New York: Riverhead Books, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">Bryson, Mary, Lori MacIntosh, Sharalyn Jordan, and Hui-Ling Lin. “Virtually Queer? Homing Devices, Mobility, and Un/Belongings.” <i>Canadian Journal of Communication</i> 31, no. 4 (December 21, 2006). http://www.cjc-online.ca.</p>
        <p class="rf">Buber, Martin. <i>I and Thou</i>. Translated by Walter Kaufmann. New York: Charles Scriber’s Sons, 1970.</p>
        <p class="rf">Burch, Gerald F., John H. Batchelor, and Ronald H. Humphrey. “Emotional Labor for Entrepreneurs: A Natural and Necessary Extension.” <i>Entrepreneurship Research Journal</i> 3, no. 3 (January 12, 2013). doi:10.1515/erj-2012–0022.</p>
        <p class="rf">Burgess, Jean. “Hearing Ordinary Voices: Cultural Studies, Vernacular Creativity and Digital Storytelling.” <i>Continuum</i> 20, no. 2 (June 1, 2006): 201–14. doi:10.1080/10304310600641737.</p>
        <p class="rf">Casey, Catherine, and Patricia Alach. “‘Just a Temp?’ Women, Temporary Employment and Lifestyle.” Work, Employment and Society 18, no. 3 (September 1, 2004): 459–80. doi:10.1177/0950017004045546.</p>
        <p class="rf">Cavicchi, Daniel. “Loving Music: Listeners, Entertainments, and the Origins of Music Fandom in the Nineteenth Century.” In <i>Fandom: Identities and Communities in a Mediated World</i>, edited by Jonathan Alan Gray, Cornel Sandvoss, and C. Lee Harrington. New York: New York University Press, 2007.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p228" class="page"></a>———. <i>Tramps Like Us: Music and Meaning among Springsteen Fans</i>. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.</p>
        <p class="rf">Cills, Hazel. “How David Bowie Predicted Internet Fandom.” <i>MTV News</i>. http://www.mtv.com. Accessed January 23, 2017.</p>
        <p class="rf">Cline, C. “Essays from <i>Bitch</i>: The Women’s Rock Newsletter with Bite.” In <i>The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media</i>, edited by Lisa A. Lewis, 69–83. London: Routledge Press, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Collins, Katie. “Why Beyonce Has Only Tweeted Eight Times.” <i>WIRED UK</i>. http://www.wired.co.uk. Accessed November 8, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Computer History Museum. “Computer History Museum: Guide to the Community Memory Records.” 2005. http://archive.computerhistory.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Condry, Ian. “Cultures of Music Piracy an Ethnographic Comparison of the US and Japan.” <i>International Journal of Cultural Studies</i> 7, no. 3 (September 1, 2004): 343–63. doi:10.1177/1367877904046412.</p>
        <p class="rf">Crowe, Cameron. “Harry Styles’ New Direction: Singer Opens Up about Famous Flings, Honest New LP.” <i>Rolling Stone</i>, April 18, 2017. http://www.rollingstone.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Davis, Miles. <i>Miles</i>. New ed. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011.</p>
        <p class="rf">Dayan, Daniel. “The Peculiar Public of Television.” <i>Media, Culture and Society</i> 23, no. 6 (November 1, 2001): 743–65. doi:10.1177/016344301023006004.</p>
        <p class="rf">Dean, Jodi. “Communicative Capitalism: Circulation and the Foreclosure of Politics.” <i>Cultural Politics</i> 1, no. 1 (March 1, 2005): 51–74. doi:10.2752/174321905778054845.</p>
        <p class="rf">De Micheli, Carlo, and Andrea Stroppa. “Twitter and the Underground Market.” <i>Nexa Center for Internet and Society</i>. Turin, 2013. http://nexa.polito.it.</p>
        <p class="rf">DeNora, Tia. <i>After Adorno: Rethinking Music Sociology</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Music in Everyday Life</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.</p>
        <p class="rf">Doub, Bo. “Community Memory: Precedents in Social Media and Movements.” <i>Computer History Museum</i>, February 23, 2016. http://www.computerhistory.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Driscoll, Kevin. “Hobbyist Inter-Networking and the Popular Internet Imaginary: Forgotten Histories of Networked Personal Computing, 1978–1998.” University of Southern California, 2014. http://digitallibrary.usc.edu.</p>
        <p class="rf">Duffy, Brooke Erin. <i>(Not) Getting Paid to Do What You Love: Gender, Social Media, and Aspirational Work</i>. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2017.</p>
        <p class="rf">Duffy, Brooke Erin, and Elizabeth Wissinger. “Cultural Work in the Social Media Age: Lessons from the Insta-Glam.”<i> International Meeting of the Association of Internet Researchers.</i> October 2016, Berlin.</p>
        <p class="rf">Ehrenreich, Barbara, Elizabeth Hess, and Gloria Jacobs. “Beatlemania: Girls Just Want to Have Fun.” In <i>The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media</i>, edited by Lisa A. Lewis, 84–106. London: New York: Routledge, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Fehr, Beverley. “Intimacy Expectations in Same-Sex Friendships: A Prototype Interaction-Pattern Model.” <i>Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i> 86, no. 2 (February 2004): 265–84. doi:10.1037/0022–3514.86.2.265.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p229" class="page"></a>Fiske, John. “The Cultural Economy of Fandom.” In <i>The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media</i>, edited by Lisa A. Lewis, 30–49. London: Routledge, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Fonarow, Wendy. <i>Empire of Dirt: The Aesthetics and Rituals of British Indie Music</i>. Annotated ed. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 2006.</p>
        <p class="rf">Fortunati, Leopoldina. “Immaterial Labor and Its Machinization.” <i>Ephemera</i> 7, no. 1 (January 1, 2007): 139–57.</p>
        <p class="rf">Fox, Aaron A. <i>Real Country: Music and Language in Working-Class Culture</i>. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2004.</p>
        <p class="rf">Friedlander, Emilie. “Grimes in Reality.” <i>FADER</i>, July 28, 2015. http://www.thefader.com/2015/07/28/grimes-cover-story-interview.</p>
        <p class="rf">Frith, Simon. <i>Performing Rites: On the Value of Popular Music</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Sound Effects</i>. New York: Pantheon, 1981.</p>
        <p class="rf">Future of Music Coalition. “Artist Revenue Streams: A Multi-Method, Cross-Genre Examination of How US Based Musicians and Composers Are Earning a Living.” http://money.futureofmusic.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gadlin, Howard. “Private Lives and Public Order: A Critical View of the History of Intimate Relations in the United States.” In <i>Close Relationships: Perspectives on the Meaning of Intimacy</i>, edited by George Klaus Levinger and Harold L. Raush, 33–72. Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press, 1977.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gershman, Jacob. “The Prince of Copyright Enforcement.” <i>Wall Street Journal</i>, April 21, 2016. http://blogs.wsj.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gibson, James J. “The Theory of Affordances.” In <i>Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing: Toward an Ecological Psychology</i>, edited by Robert Shaw, John Bransford, and James J. Gibson, 127–43. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1977.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gill, Rosalind, and Andy Pratt. “In the Social Factory? Immaterial Labour, Precariousness and Cultural Work.” <i>Theory, Culture and Society</i> 25, no. 7–8 (2008): 1–30. doi:10.1177/0263276408097794.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gillespie, Tarleton. “The Politics of ‘Platforms.’” <i>New Media and Society</i> 12, no. 3 (May 1, 2010): 347–64. doi:10.1177/1461444809342738.</p>
        <p class="rf">Goffman, Erving. <i>Forms of Talk</i>. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1981.</p>
        <p class="rf">Goldman, David. “Music’s Lost Decade: Sales Cut in Half.” <i>CNN Money</i>, February 3, 2010. http://money.cnn.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Grandey, Alicia, James Diefendorff, and Deborah E. Rupp, eds. <i>Emotional Labor in the 21st Century: Diverse Perspectives on Emotion Regulation at Work</i>. New York: Routledge, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gray, Jonathan. “New Audiences, New Textualities: Anti-Fans and Non-Fans.” <i>International Journal of Cultural Studies</i> 6, no. 1 (March 1, 2003): 64–81. doi:10.1177/1367877903006001004.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gray, Jonathan, Cornel Sandvoss, and Henry Jenkins. “Introduction.” In <i>Fandom: Identities and Communities in a Mediated World</i>, edited by C. Lee Harrington. New York: New York University Press, 2007.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p230" class="page"></a>Gray, Mary, and Siddharth Suri. “Spike in Online Gig Work: Flash in the Pan or Future of Employment?” <i>In the Crowd</i>, November 17, 2016. http://www.inthecrowd.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Grazian, David. <i>Blue Chicago</i>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gregg, Melissa. “Learning to (Love) Labour: Production Cultures and the Affective Turn.” <i>Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies</i> 6, no. 2 (June 1, 2009): 209–14. doi:10.1080/14791420902868045.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Work’s Intimacy</i>. Cambridge: Polity, 2011.</p>
        <p class="rf">Grossberg, Lawrence. “Is There a Fan in the House? The Affective Sensibility of Fandom.” In <i>The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media</i>, edited by Lisa A. Lewis. London: Routledge, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gutek, Barbara A., Anita Bhappu, Matthew A. Liao-Troth, and Bennett Cherry. “Distinguishing between Service Relationships and Encounters.” <i>Journal of Applied Psychology</i> 84, no. 2 (1999): 218–33. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.84.2.218.</p>
        <p class="rf">Gutek, Barbara A., Bennett Cherry, Anita D. Bhappu, Sherry Schneider, and Loren Woolf. “Features of Service Relationships and Encounters.” <i>Work and Occupations</i> 27, no. 3 (August 1, 2000): 319–52. doi:10.1177/0730888400027003004.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hall, Jeffrey A. “Sex Differences in Friendship Expectations: A Meta-Analysis.” <i>Journal of Social and Personal Relationships</i> 28, no. 6 (December 2010): 723–47. doi:10.1177/0265407510386192.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hann, Michael. “Bruce Springsteen: ‘You Can Change a Life in Three Minutes with the Right Song.’” <i>Guardian</i>, October 30, 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/music.</p>
        <p class="rf">Haynes, Bruce. <i>The End of Early Music: A Period Performer’s History of Music for the Twenty-First Century</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hebdige, Dick. <i>Subculture: The Meaning of Style</i>. Rev. ed. London: Routledge, 1979.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hellekson, Karen. “A Fannish Field of Value: Online Fan Gift Culture.” <i>Cinema Journal</i> 48, no. 4 (September 27, 2009): 113–18. doi:10.1353/cj.0.0140.</p>
        <p class="rf">Helms, Gesa. “The Presence of Precarity: Self-Employment as Contemporary Form.” <i>Variant</i> 41 (Spring 2011): 39–42.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hersh, Kristin. “Thoughts on Sustainability.” August 30, 2007. https://www.kristinhersh.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “What Is a Strange Angel?” https://www.kristinhersh.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hesmondhalgh, David. <i>Why Music Matters</i>. Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hesmondhalgh, David, and Sarah Baker. <i>Creative Labour: Media Work in Three Cultural Industries</i>. London: Routledge, 2011.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Creative Work and Emotional Labour in the Television Industry.” <i>Theory, Culture and Society</i> 25, no. 7–8 (December 1, 2008): 97–118. doi:10.1177/0263276408097798.</p>
        <p class="rf">Higgins, Parker. “Prince Inducted into Takedown Hall of Shame with New Lifetime Aggrievement Award.” <i>Electronic Frontier Foundation</i>, May 7, 2013. https://www.eff.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hillhouse, Alison. “Study: MTV’s ‘Music to the M Power.’” <i>Viacom Corporate: Blog.Viacom</i>. June 5, 2013. http://blog.viacom.com.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p231" class="page"></a>Hills, Matt. <i>Fan Cultures</i>. London: Routledge, 2002.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hochschild, Arlie Russell. <i>The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling</i>. 1983. 3rd ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>The Outsourced Self: What Happens When We Pay Others to Live Our Lives for Us</i>. 2012. Reprint, New York: Picador, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Honan, Mat. “How to Use Social Media to Juice Your Story’s Popularity.” <i>WIRED</i>, July 16, 2013. https://www.wired.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Horton, Donald, and R. Richard Wohl. “Mass Communication and Para-Social Interaction.” <i>Psychiatry</i> 19, no. 3 (August 1, 1956): 215–29. doi:10.1080/00332747.1956.11023049.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hughes, Jerald, and Karl Reiner Lang. “If I Had a Song: The Culture of Digital Community Networks and Its Impact on the Music Industry.” <i>International Journal on Media Management</i> 5, no. 3 (January 1, 2003): 180–89. doi:10.1080/14241270309390033.</p>
        <p class="rf">Hyde, Lewis. <i>The Gift: Creativity and the Artist in the Modern World</i>. New York: Vintage, 1983.</p>
        <p class="rf">IFPI. “IFPI Global Music Report 2016.” http://ifpi.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Recorded Music Sales 2008.” London: International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, 2009. http://www.ifpi.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Ingram, Mathew. “Prince Was an Early Fan of the Internet, but Grew to Hate What It Did to Artists.” <i>Fortune</i>, April 22, 2016. http://fortune.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Jarnow, Jesse. <i>Heads: A Biography of Psychedelic America</i>. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Jarrett, Kylie. <i>Feminism, Labour and Digital Media: The Digital Housewife</i>. New York: Routledge, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “The Relevance of ‘Women’s Work’: Social Reproduction and Immaterial Labour in Digital Media.” <i>Television and New Media</i> 15, no. 1 (May 15, 2013): 14–29. doi:10.1177/1527476413487607.</p>
        <p class="rf">Jenkins, Henry. <i>Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide</i>, 2006. Rev. ed. New York: New York University Press, 2008.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture</i>. 1992. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf">Jenkins, Henry, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. <i>Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture</i>. New York; London: New York University Press, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Johnson, Maurice. “A Historical Analysis: The Evolution of Commercial Rap Music.” Unpublished master’s thesis. Florida State University, 2011. http://diginole.lib.fsu.edu/etd/3486.</p>
        <p class="rf">Kaplan, A. “The Life of Dialogue.” In <i>Communication: A Discussion at the Nobel Conference</i>, edited by J. D. Roslansky, 87–108. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1969.</p>
        <p class="rf">Keating, Zoë. “There Is a Light at the End of the Tunnel. My Son Just Got Up and Poured a Bowl of Cereal and Milk without Me.” <i>@zoecello.</i> June 7, 2017. https://twitter.com/zoecello.</p>
        <p class="rf">Keil, Charles, and Steven Feld. <i>Music Grooves: Essays and Dialogues</i>. 2nd ed. Tucson, Ariz.: Fenestra Books, 2005.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p232" class="page"></a>Kirsner, Scott. <i>Fans, Friends and Followers: Building an Audience and a Creative Career in the Digital Age</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2009.</p>
        <p class="rf">Kot, Greg. <i>Ripped: How the Wired Generation Revolutionized Music</i>. New York: Scribner, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">Kraft, James P. <i>Stage to Studio: Musicians and the Sound Revolution, 1890–1950</i>. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.</p>
        <p class="rf">Kruse, Holly. <i>Site and Sound: Understanding Independent Music Scenes</i>. New York: Peter Lang, 2003.</p>
        <p class="rf">Kusek, Dave. “10 Secrets of Social Media for Musicians.” <i>Hypebot.com</i>. http://www.hypebot.com. Accessed November 8, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Lauer, Christopher. <i>Intimacy: A Dialectical Study</i>. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Lena, Jennifer C. <i>Banding Together: How Communities Create Genres in Popular Music</i>. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014.</p>
        <p class="rf">Levinger, George Klaus, and Harold L. Raush. Preface to <i>Close Relationships: Perspectives on the Meaning of Intimacy</i>, edited by George Klaus Levinger and Harold L. Raush. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1977.</p>
        <p class="rf">Litt, Eden. “Knock, Knock. Who’s There? The Imagined Audience.” <i>Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media</i> 56, no. 3 (July 1, 2012): 330–45. doi:10.1080/08838151.2012.705195.</p>
        <p class="rf">Livingstone, Sonia. “The Challenge of Changing Audiences: Or, What Is the Audience Researcher to Do in the Age of the Internet?” <i>European Journal of Communication</i> 19, no. 1 (March 1, 2004): 75–86. doi:10.1177/0267323104040695.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “On the Relation between Audiences and Publics.” In <i>Audiences and Publics: When Cultural Engagement Matters for the Public Sphere</i>, edited by Sonia Livingstone, 17–41. Bristol: Intellect, 2005.</p>
        <p class="rf">Lutgen-Sandvik, Pamela, Sarah E. Riforgiate, and Courtney Fletcher. “Work as a Source of Positive Emotional Experiences and the Discourses Informing Positive Assessment.” <i>Western Journal of Communication</i> 75, no. 1 (January 31, 2014): 2–27. doi:10.1080/10570314.2010.536963.</p>
        <p class="rf">Major, Clarence, ed. <i>Juba to Jive: A Dictionary of African-American Slang</i>. London: Puffin, 1994.</p>
        <p class="rf">Marwick, Alice E. <i>Status Update: Celebrity, Publicity, and Branding in the Social Media Age</i>. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Marwick, Alice E., and danah boyd. “I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience.” <i>New Media and Society</i>, July 7, 2010. doi:10.1177/1461444810365313.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “To See and Be Seen: Celebrity Practice on Twitter.” <i>Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies</i> 17, no. 2 (May 1, 2011): 139–58. doi:10.1177/1354856510394539.</p>
        <p class="rf">Mauss, Marcel. <i>The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies</i>. Translated by W. D. Hall. New York: W. W. Norton, 2000.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p233" class="page"></a>Mayberry, Lauren. “Chvrches’ Lauren Mayberry: ‘I Will Not Accept Online Misogyny.’” <i>Guardian</i>, September 30, 2013. https://www.theguardian.com/music.</p>
        <p class="rf">Mayer-Schönberger, Viktor, and Kenneth Cukier. <i>Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think</i>. Boston: Eamon Dolan/Mariner Books, 2014.</p>
        <p class="rf">McVeigh-Schultz, Joshua, and Nancy K. Baym. “Thinking of You: Vernacular Affordance in the Context of the Microsocial Relationship App, Couple.” <i>Social Media + Society</i> 1, no. 2 (September 22, 2015). doi:10.1177/2056305115604649.</p>
        <p class="rf">Mihelich, John, and John Papineau. “Parrotheads in Margaritaville: Fan Practice, Oppositional Culture, and Embedded Cultural Resistance in Buffett Fandom.” <i>Journal of Popular Music Studies</i> 17, no. 2 (August 1, 2005): 175–202. doi:10.1111/j.1524-2226.2005.00041.x.</p>
        <p class="rf">Mihm, Stephen. “Gig Work Used to Just Be Called ‘Work.’” <i>Bloomberg View</i>, July 16, 2015. https://www.bloombergview.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Milner, R. M. “Negotiating Text Integrity.” <i>Information, Communication and Society</i> 13, no. 5 (August 1, 2010): 722–46. doi:10.1080/13691180903456538.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Working for the Text: Fan Labor and the New Organization.” <i>International Journal of Cultural Studies</i> 12, no. 5 (September 1, 2009): 491–508. doi:10.1177/1367877909337861.</p>
        <p class="rf">Mitchell, David T., and Sharon L. Snyder. “Narrative Prosthesis and the Materiality of Metaphor.” <i>Narrative Prosthesis</i>. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2001.</p>
        <p class="rf">Montgomery, Barbara M., and Leslie A. Baxter, eds. <i>Dialectical Approaches to Studying Personal Relationships</i>. Mahwah, N.J.: Psychology Press, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Morini, Cristina, and Andrea Fumagalli. “Life Put to Work: Towards a Life Theory of Value: Digital Labour—Workers, Authors, Citizens.” <i>Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization</i> 10, no. 3/4 (2010): 234–52.</p>
        <p class="rf">Morris, Jeremy Wade. “Artists as Entrepreneurs, Fans as Workers.” <i>Popular Music and Society</i> 37, no. 3 (May 27, 2014): 273–90. doi:10.1080/03007766.2013.778534.</p>
        <p class="rf">Muehlebach, Andrea. “On Affective Labor in Post-Fordist Italy.” <i>Cultural Anthropology</i> 26, no. 1 (February 1, 2011): 59–82. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01080.x.</p>
        <p class="rf">Napoli, Philip M. <i>Audience Evolution: New Technologies and the Transformation of Media Audiences</i>. New York: Columbia University Press, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">Neal, Mark Anthony. <i>What the Music Said: Black Popular Music and Black Public Culture</i>. New York: Routledge, 1999.</p>
        <p class="rf">Neff, Gina. <i>Venture Labor: Work and the Burden of Risk in Innovative Industries</i>. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">Negus, Keith. <i>Music Genres and Corporate Cultures</i>. London: Routledge, 1999.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. <i>Popular Music in Theory: An Introduction</i>. Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, 1996.</p>
        <p class="rf">Negus, Keith, and Michael Pickering. <i>Creativity, Communication and Cultural Value</i>. London; Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE, 2004.</p>
        <p class="rf">“Noel Gallagher—‘The Fantasy’s Gone Out of Making Music.’” <i>NME</i>, November 8, 2006. http://www.nme.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Nunberg, Geoff. “Goodbye Jobs, Hello ‘Gigs’: How One Word Sums Up a New Economic Reality.” <i>NPR.org</i>, January 11, 2016. http://www.npr.org.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p234" class="page"></a>Nussbaum, Martha C. <i>Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.</p>
        <p class="rf">O’Hara, Kenton, and Barry Brown, eds. <i>Consuming Music Together: Social and Collaborative Aspects of Music Consumption Technologies</i>. Berlin: Springer, 2006.</p>
        <p class="rf">O’Reilly, Daragh, and Kathy Doherty. “Music B(r)ands Online and Constructing Community: The Case of New Model Army.” In <i>Cybersounds: Essays on Virtual Music Culture</i>, edited by Michael D. Ayers. New York: Peter Lang, 2006.</p>
        <p class="rf">Paine, Andre. “IFPI: $1 Million to Break an Act.” <i>Billboard</i>, March 9, 2010. http://www.billboard.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Palmer, Amanda. <i>The Art of Asking: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Let People Help</i>. New York: Grand Central, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">Parks, Malcolm R. “Ideology in Interpersonal Communication: Off the Couch and into the World.” In <i>Communication Yearbook 5</i>, edited by M. Burgoon, 79–107. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1981.</p>
        <p class="rf">Perlroth, Nicole. “Researchers Call Out Twitter Celebrities with Suspicious Followings.” <i>Bits Blog</i>, 1366923467, April 25, 2013. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Peterson, Richard A. <i>Creating Country Music: Fabricating Authenticity</i>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.</p>
        <p class="rf">Pew Research Center. “Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet.” <i>Pew Research Center: Internet, Science and Tech</i>, January 12, 2017. http://www.pewinternet.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Phillips, Whitney. <i>This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things: Mapping the Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Piepmeier, Alison. “Why Zines Matter: Materiality and the Creation of Embodied Community.” <i>American Periodicals</i> 18, no. 2 (2008): 213–38.</p>
        <p class="rf">Piercy, K. W. “When It Is More Than a Job: Close Relationships between Home Health Aides and Older Clients.” <i>Journal of Aging and Health</i> 12, no. 3 (August 2000): 362–87.</p>
        <p class="rf">Pinkowitz, Jacqueline Marie. “‘The Rabid Fans That Take [<i>Twilight</i>] Much Too Seriously’: The Construction and Rejection of Excess in <i>Twilight</i> Antifandom.” <i>Transformative Works and Cultures</i> 7 (September 20, 2010). doi:10.3983/twc.2011.0247.</p>
        <p class="rf">Polanyi, Livia. <i>Telling the American Story</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989.</p>
        <p class="rf">Postigo, Hector. “The Socio-Technical Architecture of Digital Labor: Converting Play into YouTube Money.” <i>New Media and Society</i>, July 3, 2014. doi:10.1177/1461444814541527.</p>
        <p class="rf">Prager, Karen J. <i>The Psychology of Intimacy</i>. New York: Guilford Press, 1995.</p>
        <p class="rf">Randolph, Sal. “Free Words to Free Manifesta: Some Experiments in Art as Gift.” <i>Ethics and the Environment</i> 8, no. 1 (2003): 61–73.</p>
        <p class="rf">Rawlins, William K. <i>The Compass of Friendship: Narratives, Identities, and Dialogues</i>. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2008.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Openness as Problematic in Ongoing Friendships: Two Conversational Dilemmas.” <i>Communication Monographs</i> 50, no. 1 (March 1, 1983): 1–13. doi:10.1080/03637758309390150.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p235" class="page"></a>Reagin, Nancy, and Anne Rubenstein. “‘I’m Buffy, and You’re History’: Putting Fan Studies into History.” <i>Transformative Works and Cultures</i> 6 (December 31, 2010). http://journal.transformativeworks.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Redmond, Sean, and Su Holmes, eds. <i>Stardom and Celebrity: A Reader</i>. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE, 2007.</p>
        <p class="rf">Regner, Tobias, and Javier A. Barria. “Do Consumers Pay Voluntarily? The Case of Online Music.” <i>Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization</i> 71, no. 2 (2009): 395–406.</p>
        <p class="rf">Reimer, Bennett, Anthony J. Palmer, Thomas A. Regelski, and Wayne D. Bowman. “Why Do Humans Value Music?” <i>Philosophy of Music Education Review</i> 10, no. 1 (March 30, 2011): 41–41.</p>
        <p class="rf">Rethink Music Initiative. “Fair Music: Transparency and Payment Flows in the Music Industry.” July 3, 2015. https://www.berklee.edu.</p>
        <p class="rf">Rheingold, Howard. <i>The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier</i>. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1993.</p>
        <p class="rf">Rosen, Jay. “The People Formerly Known as the Audience.” <i>Press Think: Ghost of Democracy in the Media Machine</i>, June 27, 2006. http://archive.pressthink.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sabattini, Laura, and Faye J. Crosby. “Ceilings and Walls: Work-Life and ‘Family Friendly’ Policies.” In <i>The Glass Ceiling in the 21st Century: Understand Barriers to Gender Equality</i>, edited by Michelle K. Ryan, Michael T. Schmitt, and Manuela Barreto, 201–23. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, 2009.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sarbanes, Janet. “Musicking and Communitas: The Aesthetic Mode of Sociality in Rebetika Subculture.” <i>Popular Music and Society</i> 29, no. 1 (February 1, 2006): 17–35. doi:10.1080/03007760500142738.</p>
        <p class="rf">Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. “The Evolution of Writing.” January 25, 2014. https://sites.utexas.edu.</p>
        <p class="rf">Schull, Natasha Dow. “Escape Mechanism: Women, Caretaking, and Compulsive Gambling.” 2002. http://dlib.bc.edu/islandora/object/bc-ir:100084.</p>
        <p class="rf">Scott, David Meerman, and Brian Halligan. <i>Marketing Lessons from the Grateful Dead: What Every Business Can Learn from the Most Iconic Band in History</i>. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2010.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sennett, Richard. <i>The Fall of Public Man</i>. New York: W. W. Norton, 1992.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sexton, Richard E., and Virginia Staudt Sexton. “Intimacy: A Historical Perspective.” In <i>Intimacy</i>, edited by Martin Fischer and George Stricker, 1–20. New York: Plenum Press, 1982.</p>
        <p class="rf">Shah, Hasit. “Poor Lonely Computer: Prince’s Misunderstood Relationship with the Internet.” <i>NPR.org</i>, March 8, 2016. http://www.npr.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Siebers, Tobin. <i>Disability Theory</i>. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2008.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sinnreich, Aram. <i>The Piracy Crusade: How the Music Industry’s War on Sharing Destroys Markets and Erodes Civil Liberties</i>. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p236" class="page"></a>Small, Christopher. <i>Musicking: The Meanings of Performing and Listening</i>. Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, 1998.</p>
        <p class="rf">Stacey, Clare L. “Finding Dignity in Dirty Work: The Constraints and Rewards of Low-Wage Home Care Labour.” <i>Sociology of Health and Illness</i> 27, no. 6 (September 2005): 831–54. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9566.2005.00476.x.</p>
        <p class="rf">Stafford, Laura. “Measuring Relationship Maintenance Behaviors: Critique and Development of the Revised Relationship Maintenance Behavior Scale.” <i>Journal of Social and Personal Relationships</i> 28, no. 2 (March 1, 2011): 278–303. doi:10.1177/0265407510378125.</p>
        <p class="rf">Stahl, Matt. <i>Unfree Masters: Popular Music and the Politics of Work</i>. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sterne, Jonathan. “There Is No Music Industry.” <i>Media Industries</i>, no. 1 (May 15, 2014). http://www.mediaindustriesjournal.org.</p>
        <p class="rf">Stopera, Matt. “A Rihanna Meet and Greet vs. an Avril Lavigne Meet and Greet.” <i>BuzzFeed</i>, May 5, 2014. http://www.buzzfeed.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Strauss, Neil. “Rolling Stones Live on Internet: Both a Big Deal and a Little Deal.” <i>New York Times</i>, November 22, 1994. http://www.nytimes.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Suisman, David. <i>Selling Sounds: The Commercial Revolution in American Music</i>. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012.</p>
        <p class="rf">Sullivan, Denise. <i>R.E.M.-Talk about the Passion: An Oral History</i>. Lancaster, Pa.: Charles F. Miller, 1994. </p>
        <p class="rf">Tagg, Philip. “‘Universal’ Music and the Case of death1.” <i>Critical Quarterly</i> 35, no. 2 (June 1, 1993): 54–85. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8705.1993.tb00469.x.</p>
        <p class="rf">Terranova, Tiziana. “Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy.” <i>Social Text 63</i> 18, no. 2 (2000): 33–58.</p>
        <p class="rf">Théberge, Paul. <i>Any Sound You Can Imagine: Making Music/Consuming Technology</i>. Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, 1997.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Everyday Fandom: Fan Clubs, Blogging, and the Quotidian Rhythms of the Internet.” <i>Canadian Journal of Communication</i> 30, no. 4 (January 10, 2006). http://www.cjc-online.ca.</p>
        <p class="rf">Thornton, Sarah. <i>Club Cultures: Music, Media, and Subcultural Capital</i>. Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, 1996.</p>
        <p class="rf">Tomlinson, Gary. <i>A Million Years of Music: The Emergence of Human Modernity</i>. New York: Zone Books, 2015.</p>
        <p class="rf">Topspin. “Average Fan Value: Methodology and Best Practices.” <i>Topspin Tumblr</i>. http://topspinmedia.tumblr.com. Accessed January 23, 2017.</p>
        <p class="rf">Torpey, Elka, and Andrew Hogan. “Working in a Gig Economy: Career Outlook: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.” <i>United States Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics</i>, May 2016. https://www.bls.gov/careeroutlook/2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Tracy, Sarah J. “Becoming a Character for Commerce: Emotion Labor, Self-Subordination, and Discursive Construction of Identity in a Total Institution.” <i>Management Communication Quarterly</i> 14, no. 1 (August 1, 2000): 90–128. doi:10.1177/0893318900141004.</p>
        <p class="rf"><a id="p237" class="page"></a>———. “Locking Up Emotion: Moving beyond Dissonance for Understanding Emotion Labor Discomfort.” <i>Communication Monographs</i> 72, no. 3 (September 1, 2005): 261–83. doi:10.1080/03637750500206474.</p>
        <p class="rf">Tremain, Rose. <i>Music and Silence</i>. New York: Washington Square Press, 2001.</p>
        <p class="rf">Turino, Thomas. <i>Music as Social Life: The Politics of Participation</i>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.</p>
        <p class="rf">Twitter. “Twitter for Musicians and Artists.” N.d. https://dev.twitter.com/media/ music.</p>
        <p class="rf">van Dijck, José. <i>The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media</i>. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Veijola, Soile, and Eeva Jokinen. “Towards a Hostessing Society? Mobile Arrangements of Gender and Labour.” <i>NORA-Nordic Journal of Feminist and Gender Research</i> 16, no. 3 (September 1, 2008): 166–81. doi:10.1080/08038740802279901.</p>
        <p class="rf">Verkerk, Marian. “Care as Process and the Quest for Autonomy.” <i>Asian Bioethics Review</i> 3, no. 2 (June 9, 2011): 150–54.</p>
        <p class="rf">Watson, Nessim. “Why We Argue about Virtual Community: A Case Study of the Phish.Net Fan Community.” In <i>Virtual Culture: Identity and Communication in Cybersociety</i>, 102–32. London: SAGE, 2002.</p>
        <p class="rf">Weeks, Kathi. “Life within and against Work: Affective Labor, Feminist Critique, and Post-Fordist Politics.” <i>Ephemera</i> 7, no. 1 (2007): 233–49.</p>
        <p class="rf">Whittaker, Jason. “Dark Webs: Goth Subcultures in Cyberspace.” <i>Gothic Studies</i> 9, no. 1 (May 2007): 35–45.</p>
        <p class="rf">Wikström, Patrik. <i>The Music Industry: Music in the Cloud</i>. 2nd ed. London: Polity, 2013.</p>
        <p class="rf">Wiseman, Jacqueline P. “Friendship: Bonds and Binds in a Voluntary Relationship.” <i>Journal of Social and Personal Relationships</i> 3, no. 2 (June 1, 1986): 191–211. doi:10.1177/0265407586032005.</p>
        <p class="rf">Wissinger, Elizabeth. “Glamour Labour in the Age of Kardashian.” <i>Critical Studies in Fashion and Beauty</i> 7, no. 2 (2016): 141–52.</p>
        <p class="rf">———. “Modelling a Way of Life: Immaterial and Affective Labour in the Fashion Modelling Industry.” <i>Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization</i> 7, no. 1 (2007): 250–69.</p>
        <p class="rf">Witt, Stephen. <i>How Music Got Free: A Story of Obsession and Invention</i>. New York: Penguin Books, 2016.</p>
        <p class="rf">Woolley, David R. “PLATO: The Emergence of Online Community.” January 10, 1994. http://thinkofit.com.</p>
        <p class="rf">Zappavigna, Michele. “Ambient Affiliation: A Linguistic Perspective on Twitter.” <i>New Media and Society</i> 13, no. 5 (August 1, 2011): 788–806. doi:10.1177/1461444810385097.</p>
        <p class="rf">Zelizer, Viviana A. <i>The Purchase of Intimacy</i>. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2005.</p>
      </div>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>