<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="conc" class="chapter" epub:type="conclusion">
      <h1 class="ct"><a id="p193" class="page"></a><a class="xref" href="baym-0007.xhtml#toc">Conclusion</a></h1>
      <h1 class="cs">Staying Human</h1>
      <p class="pf">Musicians were among the first to have their livelihood challenged by digital media. They were also among the first to adapt by using social media to build relationships with audiences hoping it might lead to sustainable revenue in uncertain economic times. Musicians’ stories illuminate cultural, historical, economic, and technological forces that transcend them. Their experiences have implications for how we understand the new relational labor of playing to crowds across a variety of fields, especially as it encompasses social media. When more and more people feel that their livelihood depends on how well they self-brand, self-promote, and connect, relational labor becomes less and less optional.</p>
      <p>Our most personal time and experience is now always a potential tool for commerce, raising concerns about how to hold on to the best of what makes us human and our capacity to reach our individual potentials while also forming long-lasting bonds that support ourselves and one another. As Viviana Zelizer asks, “what combinations of economic activity and intimate relations produce happier, more just, and more productive lives?”<a id="en437r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en437">1</a> The connections built through relational labor straddle and reconfigure boundaries between personal life, with all of its rewards, pleasures and problems, and work life, with all of the same. This book has identified a variety of relational dynamics and specific strategies artists use to address them. In this brief conclusion, I ask what we can learn from musicians that will help us understand the relationships at the heart of relational labor, and what advice might be gleaned for those who do relational labor, for audiences, and for those creating the platforms through which they interact.</p>
      <p>It is essential to keep the concept of <i>relationships</i> foremost in our hearts and minds. Too often, it’s presented as a gloss based on the assumption<a id="p194" class="page"></a> that we all know what it means so we needn’t unpack it or pay it much sustained attention. When we oversimplify relationships as “connection,” we miss that they are processes. We miss the competing demands they place on us, the ways connection always entails disconnection, and how tricky it is to find the sweet spots in between. We too easily assume that relationships that do not feel voluntary and where power is a source of struggle can seamlessly merge with something like “friendship,” which is defined by equality and both people’s choices to be in relationship.</p>
      <p>There are many kinds of relationships at play in relational labor, and the boundaries that differentiate them are blurry. As people navigate the daily waters of interaction, possibilities are always in dynamic flux. One moment you may be a friend, the next an idol. You may be offering comfort or status to one person this minute and under attack from another the next. You may move between speaking as the center of attention, as server, caretaker, collaborator, citizen, and—let us not forget—fan. Sometimes you encounter audiences as individuals, other times as groups or even communities. The people with whom you relate also have relationships with one another. All this happens at once. Anyone who imagines they can use social media, yet focus only on the one kind of audience member they seek, is naïve.</p>
      <p>Each of these audiences, whether group or individual, has their own needs and priorities, creating different pushes and pulls in the relationships. These complementary and competing needs are negotiated moment by moment, turn by turn, through communication. It is the ongoing, ever-changing nature of this interaction that creates relationships and keeps them alive. The end of interaction is the end of relationship. Just as the needs of relational laborers and their audiences inevitably may be in tension in any given interaction, so too may laborers’ own personal and professional needs.</p>
      <p>The multiple, messy, dynamic relationships that come from relational labor offer real opportunities both professional and personal. We’ve seen people form social ties that are entertaining, pleasurable, enriching, and profoundly validating. Building and sustaining these relationships is a way to participate in and foster relational and communal life for oneself and for others. The chance to interact directly with people who appreciate your work can help you to better understand what your work means, and <a id="p195" class="page"></a>hence its real value. Professionally, these relationships can support us not just by providing customers for a finished work but also at every stage of the process, from cheering us on along the way to shaping and financing work to distributing and publicizing it and to creating the online and sometimes offline communities and infrastructures to sustain it.</p>
      <p>At the same time, these relationships pose personal and professional challenges. Being in touch, as Nacho Vegas said, is “too much easier.” It is hard to construct messages that balance so many competing needs when audiences are so diverse and noisy. Sometimes audiences are entitled and want more than you are willing or able to give. Not all are friendly, and some are much too friendly. They can be too much, in too many ways. The learning curve is steep and what’s on it is always changing. It takes time, yet it’s not always clear how, if at all, it pays off financially. For many people, time spent in many of their relational efforts, including time on social media, may not. We know nothing about what works for which people, when, where, and how.</p>
      <p>In each moment of encounter with audiences, different aspects of our selves are called into being. We come to be who we are through ongoing communication with other people. “The very idea of a self requires the idea of an other even as it contrasts with it,” writes William Rawlins.<a id="en438r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en438">2</a> As Brian Travers said of the audiences that come to see his band, “they give you permission to be what you’re going to be.” Onstage and off, others’ recognition shapes our personhood.<a id="en439r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en439">3</a> At their best, the relationships and interactions with the audiences people seek for their work, whatever work that may be, are sources of significance, validation, and inspiration that strengthen their understanding of and belief in their own value. But these relationships and encounters also threaten our personhood.<a id="en440r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en440">4</a> At their worst, crowds and the people in them are demoralizing, dehumanizing, and dangerous.</p>
      <p>No matter how personally enriching these relationships may be, their creation and maintenance require labor. It is another job layered on top of those for which relational laborers get explicit credit. Much of this labor involves the feminized work of expressing and assisting others with emotion and relationship. It is mundane and domestic, mirroring housework in its multiplicity of tasks, never-ending nature, lack of recognition, and sometimes in the locations from which it is done. Relational work is often seen as “immaterial,” in contrast to “productive”<a id="p196" class="page"></a> labor. “We are still embedded in a masculine model of what is work, what is skilled work, what is productive work,” writes Sharon Bolton, “and I think this is what we need to move away from if emotion work is to be recognised as work, not merely as social interaction, caring, embodied and/or women’s work.”<a id="en441r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en441">5</a> Bolton argues that there are “tragic consequences” of thinking about emotional work as immaterial “because, fundamentally, it misses emotion work’s materiality and overlooks the fact that it is hard and productive work that is often unrewarded and unrecognised because of its association with the domestic sphere.” Like housework, emotion work “does not quite count as labor but is nonetheless crucial to getting other things done.” Having to put your daily, personal self into utilitarian service as a means of building relationships that will offer professional sustenance threatens to transform our selves and one another into vehicles for commerce. A minimal first step toward helping people who do this kind of work flourish is to recognize that it is real, difficult, skilled, ongoing, and that it matters.</p>
      <p>People’s relationships with audiences are shaped by psychological and sociological dialectics that are at play in all relationships. Each time people stay silent or construct and respond to one another’s messages, we are negotiating and managing competing dialectics, though we seldom think of it that way as we do. We seek intimacy and closeness yet also formality and distance. We seek autonomy, yet also interdependence, individualism yet also community. We seek to be open yet also restrained. We seek to dominate, yet also be equal and subservient. We seek the transcendence that can only come from losing ourselves in the flow of experience, yet we seek to control that flow. We seek others for the value they offer in and of themselves, yet also for how they can be used to further other aims. Our relationships are situated in contexts that include other relationships and are in dynamic tension with them, from the microlevel respect for privacy that a spouse demands to the macrolevel shifts among workers and other actors in newly destabilized industries and economies.</p>
      <p>Dialectics are always in further tension with one another, and they never really settle. As historical dynamics shift, so too do the pressures. Technologies, the new possibilities they present, and the norms that emerge through and around their use, make some dialectics more <a id="p197" class="page"></a>relevant, some ends of dialectics easier and others harder, some ends desirable and others out of fashion. Technologies shape contexts, and in so doing reshape the everyday pushes and pulls of our relationships. To an extent, new media of any historical moment enhance and make visible practices that have long histories, whether in musician-audience relationships, friendships, or any other field of human endeavor. But in other ways, new media recalibrate the external pressures on those relationships, altering their potentials as they do.</p>
      <p>Social media and the internet more generally have made it possible for people to communicate day in and day out with audiences far and wide. In so doing, they have pushed people’s public communication to be more daily, more personal, and, for those used to being positioned as powerful media voices, less dominant and more interactive. By design, social media offer participants equal access to the floor and tremendous flexibility in the social roles they take toward one another and toward the things they communicate. The pendulum swings toward participation and away from control, toward connection and away from autonomy, creating more obligation.</p>
      <p>The affordances offered by social media and the devices through which they are accessed, as well as the norms that emerge around and through their use, push people further toward definitions of “authenticity” that focus on revelation of an innermost self rather than fidelity to one’s social situatedness or adherence to the manufactured constraints of a genre. Being distant, reserved, and surrounded by mystique is out. Being interpersonal and open is in. There’s more potential for validation, but we are more vulnerable too. Connecting through devices ever present in our pockets brings the public into our most private domestic spaces and can turn our most private moments into outward-facing self-commodification. Everything we do or don’t do online can send statements about who we are and how we see our relationships with others, including those who may be our customers, clients, or potential employers. Making decisions about where to be present online, setting privacy settings, turning comments on and off, and the myriad other acts that go into setting the boundaries of mediated relationships with audiences are essential parts of relational labor.</p>
      <p>Relational labor practices on social media may or may not benefit workers, but they definitely benefit those with stock in the platforms. <a id="p198" class="page"></a>Rather than assuming the truth of claims that we need these things to have viable careers, we should look critically, asking what works for which people and when, as well as what we are willing to do ourselves. Social media afford the potential for meaningful relational communication, yet offer no refuge from commodification or from that communication when it goes wrong. With all the push toward utilitarianism, we must work to hold on to the experience of relationships that are their own reward.</p>
      <p>Charles Keil argues that music should never be commodified and that musicians should only be rewarded with “happiness and barterlike reciprocities.”<a id="en442r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en442">6</a> One could take this argument to its (even further) extreme and argue that anything that was once participatory should be rewarded only with gifts. We’ve seen many ways the people for whom relational labor is performed offer meaningful gifts as reward. Many of the gifts audiences offer can themselves be seen as labor, replicating work that is paid in other contexts. When we think about fairness and flourishing, artists and platforms alike need to think about whether the work that audiences do is appropriately recognized and rewarded, whether through monetary compensation or other perhaps more socially valuable rewards. Everyone participating in relational labor online is communicating through platforms that profit from the continuing presence of the interactions they generate. Happiness and barter will never be fair compensation when small sets of people profit so immensely from ownership of those platforms. Like Keil, we can dream of reinstating a world before capitalism, but we must be realistic. Those places and days were oppressive for many of the people living in them. Our quest to make this a fair world can’t rely on re-creating the past.</p>
      <p>If these relationships are going to help people flourish, they need to help them not only meet the minimal conditions of flourishing but also exceed them. We should aim for the following eight goals.</p>
      <p>First, if we expect people to engage in relational labor, the relationships they create should provide audiences with what they seek while providing those around whom they gather a predictable income that lets them afford a home, a family, a secure future, the ability to take time off work now and then without guilt, and to retain their sense of dignity in the work that they do.</p>
      <p><a id="p199" class="page"></a>Second, if we are going to take people out of organizations and leave them on their own to manage the manifold tasks work demands, we need better, more organized ways to get them resources and assistance than relying on their ability to make friends. Unions can be exclusionary and have other shortcomings, as we saw, but the functions they serve remain important. Workers and those who need them must organize to offer support, perhaps especially to the self-employed.</p>
      <p>Third, if we are going to push people into gift economies in work contexts, we need to allow them to participate on their own terms so that they can appreciate the pleasures of the social bonds that gift exchange can create without being forced into giving what they believe they should be selling. In these relationships, we should be able to exercise control, while still creating possibilities for participation.</p>
      <p>Fourth, the environments in which relational labor is enacted must be safe and, ideally, should be validating. No one, except perhaps soldiers and first responders, should have to venture into terrain where they are under attack while doing their work.</p>
      <p>Fifth, relational labor should lead to a better and more valued understanding of the self and its place in the world. The connections relational labor fosters should develop into meaningful relationships. Even if they never become close, the social value of their relationships should exceed the utilitarian.</p>
      <p>Sixth, relational labor should promote community so that those around you treat one another well and sustain one another over time. For professionals, having a community that cares about each other will help them care about you. For everyone, strong communities contribute to well-being.</p>
      <p>Seventh, the benefits of relational labor should accrue first and foremost to those relating, and only secondarily to the platforms through which they communicate or the organizations that bring them together. We must demand that the riches mined from our actions be fairly distributed.</p>
      <p>Finally, each of us should have the power to determine for ourselves how intimate we are willing to be with those who support our work. No one should be monetarily punished for choosing clear boundaries between public and private relationships.</p>
      <p><a id="p200" class="page"></a>All of this is possible, but none is given. In closing, I offer three brief thoughts for different readers on how to act toward these goals.</p>
      <h2 id="ahconc01" class="ah">Conclusions for Those Trying to Connect</h2>
      <p class="paft">If you take one thing from this book, I hope it is that there is nothing straightforward or simple about relating to audiences. It is work and it requires business savvy, technical skills, and, above all, social skills. Every message you send, whether an announcement, a snapshot from everyday life, or even silence, conveys symbolic meaning about how you see your audience and what kinds of relationships you seek to create. To be a competent communicator, as Leslie Baxter and Barbara Montgomery point out, is to keep the flow of conversation going and to foster ongoing dialogue while being sensitive to other people’s logics and their social and relational cultures.<a id="en443r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en443">7</a> To communicate competently, let alone well, with audiences, you must understand both them and yourself.</p>
      <p>There is no one right way to communicate, no strategy that works for everyone. Coping with, let alone thriving in, these new contexts requires finding ways to simultaneously attend to needs that are in opposition to one another. Synthesizing both sides of dialectic tensions into a satisfying whole takes wisdom, confidence, and a willingness to see the big picture and live with uncertainty. Even then, what is satisfying at one point may not be at another. The people to whom we relate will change, and so too will our relationships. We are always in motion. We must accept this and work from there.</p>
      <p>Though they may change, you need to think through your own moral commitments and ethics regarding relationships with audiences. Perhaps friendship is a model in which you deeply believe. Perhaps you believe in formal distance. Whatever the case, you should be mindful of the choices you make in models for new relationships.</p>
      <p>When you approach audiences primarily as markets or customers, you undermine their potential, and hence your own, from the start. Even as we operate in financial realities, we need to remember that economics should be subservient to our need to have meaningful, nonalienated lives in which we can do good work. You don’t have to think of audiences as potential friends to think of them as co-participants in creating new social and moral orders through your interactions.</p>
      <p><a id="p201" class="page"></a>When we discuss audiences, we are referring to people who are dispersed through many sites, yet networked together into subcultures that, as a rule, are far more concerned with themselves and one another than with you. They have their own hierarchies, their own norms, their own standards of what counts as fair and just exchange. They may be kind to you. They may turn on you. You must respect their autonomous needs and their value systems, even when they push against your own. Market systems urge us to control audiences. We can take advantage of audience information and practices to further our own ends, but when we datafy, territorialize, and invoke the law, we must be careful to do so in ways that benefit them as well as ourselves.</p>
      <p>Although you cannot control audiences, when they feel respected they can serve as sources of support and assistance. It’s all right to ask for more. It’s okay to take risks. There is a fine line between honoring and appropriating, though, and you need to be mindful of treating audiences as fairly as you want them to treat you. If you are in a position where others can help with your media presence, you need to think through the ethics of who you will let speak for you, when, and on what, and whether you will make it visible when it is not really you who speaks (you should). Sometimes, though, there will be conflict, just as there is conflict in all relationships. And when there is, let it be a source of growth.</p>
      <p>The best we can hope for in our engagement with audiences is a resonant cycle, where our messages go out to them, create meaning and value in their lives, and theirs come back to us and do the same in ours. Each of us has our own interest in forming close relationships with others, tolerance of risk, and degree of identification with our work. We need to become conscious of our own needs and identify our own limits. We need to be attentive to our experience and reflective, observing ourselves so that we can learn what works for us and what doesn’t. Know that your limits will change over time, sometimes by the hour. And remember, restraint is also a virtue. There are communication skills you can learn. If you don’t have them, perhaps you should. But such training can lead to competence without leading to fulfillment.<a id="en444r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en444">8</a> You may want to curtail the domains in which you focus your social efforts. If it proves more burden than boon, it is okay not to use social media. Adele doesn’t.</p>
      <h2 id="ahconc02" class="ah"><a id="p202" class="page"></a>Conclusions for Audiences</h2>
      <p class="paft">All of us are audiences, and all of us have a responsibility to think about the well-being of those who create what we use and cherish. The power to connect with others through social media means that we can put ourselves into interpersonal relationships with them even if they did not choose to be in relationship with us. We need to be mindful of the ethics of this imposition. To the extent that we think the people around whom we gather should act like friends, accessible and revealing, we must remember that friendships include both “significant privileges and responsibilities.”<a id="en445r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en445">9</a> At the very least, if we can afford it, we should pay for what we enjoy and believe is important, even if we can get it for free. If there is need and we can lend a hand, we should.</p>
      <p>But we also need to remember that people’s work is entangled in people’s selves and when we engage them as professionals, we are also engaging them as humans, with all their foibles and vulnerabilities. Being the center of attention does not come with an infinite ability to absorb the relational demands of others. It is always appropriate to be kind. Remember that just finding a public persona interesting does not mean that you are entitled to a person’s time, let alone their private life. Just as we want others to respect our autonomy, we need to respect theirs. We must also quit stalking people and heaping abuse upon them just because it’s easy. Even virtual slings and arrows cause real suffering.</p>
      <h2 id="ahconc03" class="ah">Conclusions for Platform Developers</h2>
      <p class="paft">There are few people outside of those interacting together who have more power to influence the direction in which communication values and norms flow, and hence their potential to flourish, than those creating the media through which we distribute our creations and communicate with one another. Platforms have moral responsibilities to the well-being of those who use them and the cultures in which they operate. Jodi Dean describes the current platform model as a kind of “communicative capitalism,” in which the circulation of messages is more important than their meanings. To the extent this is true, “communicativity hinders communication.”<a id="en446r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en446">10</a> I believe that communication, and even communion, happens within systems designed to exploit interactions for profit. But I still urge those with the power of design to <a id="p203" class="page"></a>consider the ethical responsibilities of their work. You are pushing the line between yin and yang this way and that, and your choices matter. If platform developers are building businesses based on people’s relationships, especially those that touch most closely on what matters most to them, they have an ethical responsibility to create conditions for relationships that help those people flourish.</p>
      <p>Affordances have material and emotional consequences in people’s lives. Social media platforms have relentlessly, and sometimes openly, pushed us further into the ideology of intimacy even as they have exploited that intimacy for profit. This book has shown a range of problems that ensue from the pressure toward closeness. Developers need to start designing social systems based on helping people manage dialectics and social platforms with multiple ways to use them right so that people can find the boundaries that work best for them. Developers should focus more attention on developing sophisticated approaches to letting people scope the scales of their interactions and define and manage boundaries as they see fit, rather than pushing them always toward more connection, more engagement, and more openness.</p>
      <p>There are many ways in which musicians and others using platforms feel unfairly treated. Platforms like social media sites tend to focus on making money by selling user data to advertisers, yet they offer users few direct ways to make money themselves. What if they took seriously the call to let those who are already using them for career gain earn money through their practices on site? YouTube and Bandcamp provide some models, but there could be many more. Micropayments have barely been explored. Furthermore, if platforms are going to algorithmically filter messages between people and those who wish to hear them, they need to give people clearer information about how those algorithms work and easier ways to get messages through to those who have chosen to receive them.</p>
      <p>I am neither first nor will I be the last to say it, but platforms must work harder to foster more civil environments in which people are less vulnerable to random and coordinated expressions of anger and hate. Ultimately, relationships belong to people, not to platforms. When our ties to one another are converted into currency for others, we have a right to ask that we be safe in those spaces. Those with the ability to shape the relational affordances of the institutions that enable and constrain<a id="p204" class="page"></a> our interactions have special responsibilities to support us in our quest to flourish.</p>
      <h2 id="ahconc04" class="ah">Final Thought</h2>
      <p class="paft">Work and life are not different domains. The work we do and the self we are produce one another. “Once we recognize that work produces subjects,” writes Kathi Weeks, “the borders that would contain it are called into question.”<a id="en447r" class="enref" href="baym-0023.xhtml#en447">11</a> From this holistic perspective, we must recognize the material, consequential value of relational labor, and work together across sites and relationships to achieve and expand the material conditions and affective experiences people most value. We must work to create contexts that help us to know that we matter and that what we do meaningfully contributes to others’ well-being.</p>
      <p>There are many powerful forces that make it difficult to focus on social and emotional well-being before profit, but the more social our media become, the more the former may give rise to the latter. As individuals, we cannot upend entrenched ways of organizing society and culture, but we can shape our experience within it, both through the ways we interpret our interactions and relationships with others and through ways in which we communicate with others. We are in a moment when norms are being redefined. We must all do our parts to create better ones.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>