<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US">
  <head>
    <title>Playing to the Crowd</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/default.css"/>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section id="cip" class="chapter" epub:type="copyright-page">
      <p class="crt"><a id="piv" class="page"></a>NEW YORK UNIVERSITY PRESS</p>
      <p class="crt">New York</p>
      <p class="crt"><a class="url" href="http://www.nyupress.org">www.nyupress.org</a></p>
      <p class="crtf">© 2018 by New York University</p>
      <p class="crt">All rights reserved</p>
      <p class="crtf">References to Internet websites (URLs) were accurate at the time of writing. Neither the author nor New York University Press is responsible for URLs that may have expired or changed since the manuscript was prepared.</p>
      <p class="cipf">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</p>
      <p class="cip">Names: Baym, Nancy K., author.</p>
      <p class="cip">Title: Playing to the crowd : musicians, audiences, and the intimate work of connection / Nancy K. Baym.</p>
      <p class="cip">Description: New York : New York University Press, [2018] | Series: Postmillennial pop | Includes bibliographical references and index.</p>
      <p class="cip">Identifiers: LCCN 2017045025 | ISBN 9781479896165 (cl : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781479821587 (pb : alk. paper)</p>
      <p class="cip">Subjects: LCSH<span class="sm">:</span> Popular music—Social aspects. | Music—Performance—Psychological aspects. | Popular music fans.</p>
      <p class="cip">Classification: LCC ML3918.P67 B39 2018 | DDC 781.64—dc23</p>
      <p class="cip">LC record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2017045025" class="url">https://lccn.loc.gov/2017045025</a></p>
      <p class="crtf">New York University Press books are printed on acid-free paper, and their binding materials are chosen for strength and durability. We strive to use environmentally responsible suppliers and materials to the greatest extent possible in publishing our books.</p>
      <p class="crtf">Manufactured in the United States of America</p>
      <p class="crtf">10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2</p>
      <p class="crtf">Also available as an ebook</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>