<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>Copyright Page</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">The University of Minnesota Press gratefully acknowledges financial assistance for the publication of this book from Bowling Green State University&#x2019;s Building Strength Program.</p>

    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">A different version of chapter 2 was originally published as &#x201C;&#x2018;Obvious Gays&#x2019; and the State Gaze: Cuban Gay Visibility and U.S. Immigration Policy during the 1980 Mariel Boatlift,&#x201D; <span class="italic">Journal of the History of Sexuality</span> 16, no. 3 (2007): 482&#x2013;514; copyright by the University of Texas Press; all rights reserved. A different version of chapter 4 was originally published as &#x201C;<span class="italic">P&#xe1;jaration</span> and Transculturation: Language and Meaning in Miami&#x2019;s Cuban American Gay Worlds,&#x201D; in <span class="italic">Speaking in Queer Tongues: Globalization and Gay Language,</span> ed. William L. Leap and Tom Boellstorff (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2004), 231&#x2013;50; copyright by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois; reprinted with permission of the University of Illinois Press.</p>

    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">Copyright 2013 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota</p>

    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.</p>

    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">Published by the University of Minnesota Press</p>
    <p class="noIndent">111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290</p>
    <p class="noIndent">Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520</p>
    <p class="noIndent"><a href="http://www.upress.umn.edu">http://www.upress.umn.edu</a></p>

    <p class="noIndent">ISBN <span>978-0-8166-8668-1 (epub)</span></p>

    <p class="noIndent spaceAbove">The University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator and employer.</p>
</div></body></html>