<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" /><title>Acknowledgments</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" /></head><body><div>
      
      
		<h2>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</h2>
		<h4>&#xa0;</h4>
		
		<p>I WOULD LIKE TO THANK all the men who participated in this study and generously agreed to share their lives with me. This book would not have been possible without their support, their stories, and their time. Although I cannot identify these men by name because of promises of confidentiality, I hope that if they read this text they can sense my appreciation and the respect I have for them.</p>
		<p>This project began while I was a graduate student of sociology at the University of California, Santa Barbara. I will always be indebted to Avery Gordon, my dissertation adviser and mentor, and I aspire to be the kind of scholar, writer, and teacher that she is. Other members of my dissertation committee (Beth Schneider and France Winddance Twine) also supported this work. At Santa Barbara, I benefited greatly from the support of my fellow graduate students, including Peter Chua, Darcie Vandegrift, Light Carruyo, and Lorena Garc&#xED;a.</p>
		<p>This research was supported by a Dissertation and Post-Doctoral Fellowship from the Social Science Research Council&#x2019;s Sexuality Research Fellowship Program (SRFP), with support from the Ford Foundation. This program not only allowed me to dedicate myself fully to my research but also connected me to a range of scholars who continue to influence my work. A fellow SRFP recipient, Susan Stryker, first suggested I go to an archive&#x2014;which led to the transformation of this manuscript. I thank the SRFP for its productive and dynamic annual meetings that encouraged me to meet and develop professional relationships with scholars Susan Stryker, Marysol Asencio, Pablo Mitchell, Christina Hanhardt, Kevin Murphy, and Gloria Gonz&#225;lez-L&#xf3;pez.</p>
		<p>This project matured from a dissertation into a book at Bowling Green State University (BGSU), where I have worked since graduation. I thank my colleagues in the Department of Ethnic Studies for providing an interdisciplinary home that fostered research that focused on race/ethnicity, gender, and sexuality simultaneously. I was fortunate to work with BGSU&#x2019;s Institute for the Study of Culture and Society throughout my academic career; I benefited from its Scholar in Residence program and developed my work in faculty/graduate student working groups, including the Narrative and Culture Cluster and the Sexualities and Borders Cluster. I would like to thank all those who read versions of these chapters, including Theresa Mah, Robert Buffington, Eithne Luibh&#xE9;id, Christina Gerken, Joelle Ruby Ryan, Vibha Bhalla, and Valeria Grinberg Pla.</p>
		<p>I also thank others who have supported my scholarly work: Tom&#225;s Almaguer, Ram&#xf3;n Gutierrez, and Tiffany Ana L&#xf3;pez. Nancy San Mart&#xED;n spent countless hours discussing and editing this work with me. I thank her for always being there when I needed her. I thank Jason Weidemann, senior acquisitions editor at the University of Minnesota Press, for his patience and guidance. This book is also much clearer due to the feedback from its four reviewers and the copyediting of Paula Dragosh.</p>
		<p>Eduardo Aparicio was always willing to talk to me about my research and his various cultural and political projects throughout the city. I am indebted to him for these conversations and for his willingness to share contacts. His cultural projects were inspiring, funny, and smart, and working with them helped me develop ideas that emerge throughout this book. Jos&#xE9; Davila was a constant throughout this research process: I thank him for a lifetime of friendship and for his willingness to continually challenge me and support me.</p>
		<p>I was lucky to have developed this book and related scholarly projects in the company of scholars with similar interests and passion. As a graduate student and assistant professor, I had the privilege of meeting and working with Lionel Cant&#xfa; Jr., an emerging scholar in Latino/a gay studies. Lionel was an extremely intelligent and gifted researcher, but he was also a funny, kind, and generous human being. His passing was a great loss to our field of study, and it was also a huge personal loss to all of us who knew him during his short life. I value all the conversations I have shared with Carlos Decena and Salvador Vidal-Ortiz. Throughout our careers, we have often participated side by side at academic panels, and the conversations that have occurred around the margins of conferences (which always combined serious academic critique and raucous laughter) have been invaluable.</p>
		<p>As I embarked on archival research&#x2014;something completely new to me&#x2014;I benefited greatly from the generous support of archivists everywhere I visited. I thank the staff at Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Cornell University&#x2019;s Human Sexuality Collection, Florida&#x2019;s Moving Image Archive, and Florida International University&#x2019;s Special Collections. I would like to thank Willie Walker of the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender Historical Society of Northern California (now the GLBT Historical Society), who assisted me during my first archival trip, and Shawn Wilson, who helped me on several trips to the Kinsey Archives at Indiana University.</p>
		<p>I want to thank everyone who helped me secure permissions for the images included throughout this book, especially Paul Baker from the <span class="italic">Lebanon Daily News </span>who tracked down an original negative of a 1980 photograph thirty years later.</p>
		<p>Pedro Pablo Porb&#xE9;n, my husband and life partner, has consistently supported my work. He has done everything from helping me design the club cards that I used to recruit interview participants to thinking through the arguments in my book; more generally, he has supported my emotional and physical well-being throughout this research project. I am grateful for his generosity and understanding.</p>
		<p>I dedicate this book to my mother, Estrella Pe&#xf1;a. One of my biggest regrets is that she did not see this book published while she was alive. It would be impossible to list all the ways she supported this book. She was always my biggest ally and a tireless supporter of every endeavor I decided to pursue&#x2014;whether it was going to a small liberal arts college in New England, going to graduate school in California (she was terrified of earthquakes), or writing a dissertation on Cuban American gay men. She helped this project in tangible and specific ways, like connecting me with Cuban gay men, especially those closer to her age than mine, whom I interviewed. She also contributed more significantly as well, because I would not be the person, scholar, or teacher that I am without her.</p>
		
		</div></body></html>