<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="biblio">
    <h1 class="ctfm"><a class="page" id="p181"></a><a class="page" id="p180"></a><a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">Bibliography</a></h1>

    <div class="references">
      <p class="rf">Adorno, Theodor. <i>Minima Moralia: Reflections on a Damaged Life</i>. Trans. E.&nbsp;F.&nbsp;N. Jepheott. London: Verso, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Aiken, Conrad. “An Anatomy of Melancholy.” <i>New Republic</i> (1923): 294–295. Rpt. <i>The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition</i>. Ed. Michael North. New York: Norton, 2001. 148–152.</p>

      <p class="rf">Aiken, Edward A. “‘I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold’: Charles Demuth’s Emblematic Portrait of William Carlos Williams.” <i>Art Journal</i> 46.3 (1987): 178–182.</p>

      <p class="rf">Alighieri, Dante. <i>The Divine Comedy</i>. Trans. Robert Kirkpatrick. New York: Penguin, 2013.</p>

      <p class="rf">Alpers, Svetlana. <i>The Art of Describing: Dutch Art in the Seventeenth Century</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1984.</p>

      <p class="rf">Anderson, D.&nbsp;E., and J.&nbsp;S. Reilly. “Pah! The Acquisition of Adverbials in ASL.” <i>Sign Language and Linguistics</i> 1.2 (1998): 117–142.</p>

      <p class="rf">Anderson, Sherwood. <i>American Spring Song: The Selected Poems of Sherwood Anderson</i>. Ed. Stuart Downs. Kent, OH: Kent State UP, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Cornfields.” <i>Mid-American Chants</i>. New York: Quale, 2006. 1–2.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Healer.” <i>A New Testament</i>. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927. 26–27.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Manhattan.” <i>Mid-American Chants</i>. New York: Quale, 2006. 18.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Mid-American Chants</i>. 1918. New York: Quale, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Modern Writer.” <i>Homage to Sherwood Anderson, 1876–1941</i>. Ed. Paul P. Appel. Mamaroneck, NY: Paul P. Appel, 1970. 173–190.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>A New Testament</i>. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Poet.” <i>A New Testament</i>. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Song for Lonely Roads.” <i>Mid-American Chants</i>. New York: Quale, 2006. 49.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p182"></a>———. “Song of Theodore.” <i>Mid-American Chants</i>. New York: Quale, 2006. 15–17.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>. New York: Penguin, 1992.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Word Factories.” <i>A New Testament</i>. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927. 85–88.</p>

      <p class="rf">Andrews, Austin. “Deaf Ninja.” YouTube. Accessed 16 February 2009. <a class="url">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L91KVUZRBq8. Video</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">Appelbaum, David. <i>Voice</i>. Albany: State U of New York P, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">Armstrong, Tim. <i>Modernism, Technology and the Body</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf"><i>Audism Unveiled</i>. Prod. Benjamin Bahan, H-Dirksen Bauman, and Facundo Montenegro. Dawn Sign, 2008. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bahan, Benjamin. “Face-to-Face Tradition in the American Deaf Community: Dynamics of the Teller, the Tale, and the Audience.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. 21–50.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bailey, Richard W. <i>Speaking American: A History of English in the United States</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2012.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bakhtin, Mikhail. <i>Rabelais and His World</i>. Trans. Helene Iswolsky. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1984.</p>

      <p class="rf">Ballin, Albert. <i>The Deaf Mute Howls</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Barkan, Elazar, and Ronald Bush. Introduction. <i>Prehistories of the Future: The Primitivist Project and the Culture of Modernism</i>. Ed. Barkan and Bush. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1995. 1–19.</p>

      <p class="rf">Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” <i>Image/Music/Text</i>. Trans. Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1978.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bass, Eben. “Meaningful Images in <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.” <i>Modern Language Notes</i> 76.8 (1961): 728–731.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bauman, H-Dirksen L. “Body/Text: Sign Language Poetics and Spatial Form in Literature.” <i>Signs and Voices: Deaf Culture, Identity, Language, and Arts</i>. Ed. Kristin A. Lindgren, Doreen DeLuca, and Donna Jo Napoli. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2008. 163–176.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Getting out of Line: Toward a Visual an Cinematic Poetics of ASL.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. 95–117.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “On the Disconstruction of (Sign) Language in the Western Tradition: A Deaf Reading of Plato’s <i>Cratylus</i>.” <i>Open Your Eyes: Deaf Studies Talking</i>. Ed. Bauman. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2008. 127–145.</p>

      <p class="rf">———, ed. <i>Open Your Eyes: Deaf Studies Talking</i>. Minnesota: U of Minnesota P, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Baxandall, Michael. <i>Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy: A Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1988.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p183"></a>Baynton, Douglas C. <i>Forbidden Signs: American Culture and the Campaign against Sign Language</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Silent Exile on This Earth: The Metaphorical Construction of Deafness in the Nineteenth Century.” <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>. 2nd ed. Ed. Lennard J. Davis. New York: Routledge, 2006. 33–48.</p>

      <p class="rf">Beasley, Rebecca. <i>Ezra Pound and the Visual Culture of Modernism</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bec, Louis. “Life Art.” <i>Signs of Life: Bioart and Beyond</i>. Ed. Eduardo Kac. Cambridge: MIT P, 2007. 83–92.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bell, Alexander Graham. <i>Memoir upon the Formation of a Deaf Variety of the Human Race</i>. Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1969.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bergson, Henri. <i>Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic</i>. New York: Arc Manor, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Berman, Marshall. <i>All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity</i>. New York: Penguin, 1988.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bersani, Leo. <i>Intimacies</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2010.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Is the Rectum a Grave?” <i>AIDS: Cultural Analysis&nbsp;/ Cultural Activism</i> 43 (1987): 197–222.</p>

      <p class="rf">Blackmur, R.&nbsp;P. <i>Language as Gesture: Essays in Poetry</i>. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1952.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bloom, Harold. Introduction. <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Mark Simon. New York: Liveright, 2001.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bradshaw, Melissa. <i>Amy Lowell: Diva Poet</i>. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">Bragg, Bernard. “Flowers and Moonlight.” YouTube. Updated 16 July 2010. <a class="url" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHDO8d6url4">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHDO8d6url4</a>. Video.</p>

      <p class="rf">Breslin, James E. “William Carlos Williams and Charles Demuth: Cross-Fertilization in the Arts.” <i>Journal of Modern Literature</i> 6.2 (1977): 248–263.</p>

      <p class="rf">Brueggemann, Brenda Jo. <i>Deaf Subjects: Between Identities and Places</i>. New York: New York UP, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf">Brunner, Edward J. <i>Splendid Failure: Hart Crane and the Making of “The Bridge.”</i> Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1985.</p>

      <p class="rf">Burke, Seán. <i>The Death and Return of the Author: Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida</i>. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Burnett, Gary. <i>H.D. between Image and Epic: The Mysteries of Her Poetics</i>. Ann Arbor, MI UMI Research Press, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">Burton, Stacy. “Rereading Faulkner: Authority, Criticism, and <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.” <i>Modern Philology</i> 98.4 (2001): 604–628.</p>

      <p class="rf">Cameron, Sharon. <i>Impersonality: Seven Essays</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">Carr, Helen. <i>The Verse Revolutionaries: Ezra Pound, H.D. and the Imagists</i>. London: Jonathan Cape, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf">Caso, Pere Borrell del. <i>Boy Escaping Criticism</i>. 1874. Banco de España, Madrid.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p184"></a>Cavarero, Adriana. <i>For More than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of Vocal Expression</i>. Stanford: Stanford UP, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Chaplin, Charles. <i>My Autobiography</i>. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1964.</p>

      <p class="rf">Chen, Mel Y. <i>Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect</i>. Durham: Duke UP, 2012.</p>

      <p class="rf">Churchill, Winston. “Everybody’s Language.” <i>Collier’s</i> 26 October 1935. Rpt. <i>The Essential Chaplin: Perspectives on the Life and Art of the Great Comedian</i>. Ed. Richard Schieckel. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2006. 205–214.</p>

      <p class="rf">Clark, John Lee, ed. <i>Deaf American Poetry: An Anthology</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf">Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech. Home page. 2013. <a class="url" href="http://www.clarkeschools.org/">http://www.clarkeschools.org/</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">Collier, John, Jr. <i>Visual Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method</i>. Albuquerque: U of New Mexico P, 1986.</p>

      <p class="rf">Condillac, Étienne Bonnot de. <i>Cours d’instruction du Prince de Parme</i>. Vol. 1. Parma, 1793.</p>

      <p class="rf">Conley, Willy. “Salt in the Basement: An American Sign Language Reverie in English.” <i>Deaf American Poetry: An Anthology</i>. Ed. John Lee Clark. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2009. 195–197.</p>

      <p class="rf">Connor, Rachel. <i>H.D. and the Image</i>. Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004.</p>

      <p class="rf">Cook, Peter, and Kenneth Lerner. “Poetry.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Cornia, David, Ursula Bellugi, and Judy Reilly. “Neuropsychological Studies of Linguistic and Affective Facial Expressions in Deaf Signers.” <i>Language and Speech</i> 42.203 (1999): 307–331.</p>

      <p class="rf">Courtin, Cyril. “The Impact of Sign Language on the Cognitive Development of Deaf Children: The Case of Theories of Mind.” <i>Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education</i> 5.3 (2000): 266–276.</p>

      <p class="rf">Cowley, Malcolm. “The Dilemma of <i>The Waste Land</i>.” <i>The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition</i>. Ed. Michael North. New York: Norton, 2001. 163–166.</p>

      <p class="rf">Crane, Hart. “At Melville’s Tomb.” <i>The Bridge</i>. <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. New York: Liveright, 2001. 33.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>The Bridge</i>. <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. New York: Liveright, 2001. 42–108.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Broken Tower.” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Marc Simon. New York: Liveright, 2001. 161–162.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Episode of Hands.” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Marc Simon. New York: Liveright, 2001. 173.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “General Aims and Theories.” <i>Hart Crane: Complete Poems and Selected Letters</i>. Ed. Langdon Hammer. New York: Library of America, 2006. 160–164.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Letter to Harriet Monroe.” <i>Hart Crane: Complete Poems and Selected</i> <a class="page" id="p185"></a><i>Letters</i>. Ed. Langdon Hammer. New York: Library of America, 2006. 165–169.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>O My Land, My Friends: The Selected Letters of Hart Crane</i>. Ed. Langdon Hammer and Brom Weber. New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 1997.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Voyages.” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Marc Simon. New York: Liveright, 2001. 34–40.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Wine Menagerie.” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Marc Simon. New York: Liveright, 2001. 23–24.</p>

      <p class="rf">Crawford, James. <i>At War with Diversity: US Language Policy in an Age of Anxiety</i>. Clevedon, UK: Cromwell, 2000.</p>

      <p class="rf">Crosby, Harry. “Aeronautics.” <i>Transition: A Paris Anthology</i>. New York: Doubleday, 1990. 90–92.</p>

      <p class="rf">Davidson, Michael. <i>Concerto for the Left Hand: Disability and the Defamiliar Body</i>. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Davis, Lennard J. <i>Bending Over Backwards: Disability, Dismodernism, and Other Difficult Positions</i>. New York: New York UP, 2002.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Constructing Normalcy: The Bell Curve, the Novel, and the Invention of the Disabled Body in the Nineteenth Century.” <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>. 2nd ed. Ed. Lennard J. Davis. New York: Routledge, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body</i>. London: Verso, 1995.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. Introduction. <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>. 2nd ed. Ed. Davis. New York: Routledge, 2006. xv–xviii.</p>

      <p class="rf">Dean, Tim. “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Privacy.” <i>American Literary History</i> 8.1 (1996): 83–109.</p>

      <p class="rf">Demuth, Charles. <i>I Saw the Figure 6 in Gold</i>. 1929. Oil on composition board. Alfred Stieglitz Collection, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.</p>

      <p class="rf">Descartes, René. <i>Discours de la method</i>. 1636. <i>Oeuvres de Descartes</i>. Vol. 5. Ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery. Paris: Cerf, 1913. 57–58.</p>

      <p class="rf">Dickie, Margaret. <i>On the Modernist Long Poem</i>. Iowa City: U of Iowa P, 1986.</p>

      <p class="rf">Diepeveen, Leonard. <i>The Difficulties of Modernism</i>. New York: Routledge, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">Doyle, Laura, and Laura Winkiel, eds. <i>Geomodernisms: Race, Modernism, Modernity</i>. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Dresser, Charlotte Elizabeth, and Fred Rafferty. <i>Spirit World and Spirit Life: Automatic Writing</i>. New York: J.&nbsp;F. Rowny, 1922.</p>

      <p class="rf">Duchamp, Marcel. <i>Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2</i>. 1912. Oil on canvas. 147 cm × 89.2 cm. Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia.</p>

      <p class="rf">Eliot, T.&nbsp;S. “The Metaphysical Poets.” <i>Selected Prose of T.&nbsp;S. Eliot</i>. Ed. Frank Kermode. San Diego: Harcourt, 1975. 59–67.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Tradition and the Individual Talent.” <i>The Sacred Wood and Other Essays</i>. Mineola NY: Dover, 1998. 27–33.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Waste Land.” <i>T.&nbsp;S. Eliot: The Complete Poems and Plays, 1909–1950</i>. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1950. 37–55.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p186"></a>———. <i>The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound</i>. Ed. Valerie Eliot. San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1971.</p>

      <p class="rf">Ellmann, Maud. <i>The Poetics of Impersonality: T.&nbsp;S. Eliot and Ezra Pound</i>. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1987.</p>

      <p class="rf">Esmail, Jennifer. “The Power of Deaf Poetry: The Exhibition of Literacy and the Nineteenth-Century Sign Language Debates.” <i>Sign Language Studies</i> 8.4 (2008): 348–368.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Reading Victorian Deafness: Signs and Sounds in Victorian Literature and Culture</i>. Athens: Ohio UP, 2013.</p>

      <p class="rf">Faulkner, William. “Class Conferences at the University of Virginia.” March 13, 1957. <i>The Sound and the Fury: Norton Critical Edition</i>. Ed. David Minter. New York: Norton, 1994. 234–237.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Interview with Jean Stein vanden Heuvel.” <i>The Sound and the Fury: Norton Critical Edition</i>. Ed. David Minter. New York: Norton, 1994. 232–234.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>. New York: Vintage, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">Fay, E.&nbsp;A. “Tabular Statement of American Schools for the Deaf, 1889.” <i>American Annals of the Deaf and Dumb</i> 35 (1890).</p>

      <p class="rf">Ford, Ford Maddox. “Foreword: ‘Those Were the Days.’” <i>Imagist Anthology 1930</i>. New York: Covici-Friede, 1930. 13–21.</p>

      <p class="rf">Forster, E.&nbsp;M. <i>Aspects of the Novel</i>. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1954.</p>

      <p class="rf">Foucault, Michel. <i>The Birth of the Clinic</i>. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Friendship as a Way of Life.” <i>The Essential Works of Michel Foucault: Ethics, Subjectivity and Truth</i>. Ed. Paul Rabinow. New York: New Press, 1994. 135–140.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Social Triumph of the Sexual Will.” <i>The Essential Works of Michel Foucault: Ethics, Subjectivity and Truth</i>. Ed. Paul Rabinow. New York: New Press, 1994. 157–162.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “What Is an Author?” <i>Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology</i>. Ed. James D. Faubion. Trans. Robert Hurley et al. New York: New Press, 1994. 205–222.</p>

      <p class="rf">Fox, Margalit. <i>Talking Hands</i>. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">Frank, Joseph. “From <i>Spatial Form in Modern Literature</i>.” <i>Theory of the Novel: A Historical Approach</i>. Ed. Michael McKeon. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2000. 784–802.</p>

      <p class="rf">Friedman, Susan Stanford. “Periodizing Modernism: Postcolonial Modernities and the Space/Time Borders of Modernist Studies.” <i>Modernism/Modernity</i> 13.3 (2006): 425–443.</p>

      <p class="rf">Galow, Timothy W. <i>Writing Celebrity: Stein, Fitzgerald, and the Modern(ist) Art of Self-Fashioning</i>. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">Gannon, Jack R. <i>Deaf Heritage: A Narrative History of Deaf America</i>. Silver Springs, MD: National Association of the Deaf, 1981.</p>

      <p class="rf">Garber, Randy. “Conversing and Reversing.” <i>Contemporary Impressions</i> 10.2 (2002): 2–5.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p187"></a>———. <i>Made in Translation</i>. 2011. Copper wire on copper panel.</p>

      <p class="rf">Gee, J.&nbsp;P. , and Walter J. Ong. “An Exchange on American Sign Language and Deaf Culture: J.&nbsp;P. Gee and Walter J. Ong.” <i>Language and Style: An International Journal</i> 16.2 (1983): 231–233.</p>

      <p class="rf">Gilbert, Helen. “Dance, Movement and Resistance Politics.” <i>The Post-Colonial Reader</i>. Ed. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London: Routledge, 1995. 341–345.</p>

      <p class="rf">Glass, Loren. <i>Authors Inc.: Literary Celebrity in the United States, 1880–1980</i>. New York: New York UP, 2004.</p>

      <p class="rf">Goldman, Jonathan. <i>Modernism Is the Literature of Celebrity</i>. Austin: U of Texas P, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">Goldwater, Robert. <i>Primitivism in Modern Art</i>. New York: Belknap, 1986.</p>

      <p class="rf"><i>The Great Dictator</i>. Dir. Charlie Chaplin. Charlie Chaplin Studios, 1940. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Groce, Nora Ellen. <i>Everyone Here Spoke Sign Language: Hereditary Deafness on Martha’s Vineyard</i>. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1985.</p>

      <p class="rf">Hammill, Faye. <i>Women, Celebrity, and Literary Culture between the Wars</i>. Austin: U of Texas P, 2010.</p>

      <p class="rf">Haselstein, Ulla. “Gertrude Stein’s Portraits of Matisse and Picasso.” <i>New Literary History</i> 34.4 (2003): 723–743.</p>

      <p class="rf">H.D. “Hermes of the Ways.” <i>Complete Poems 1912–1944</i>. Ed. Louis L. Martz. New York: New Directions, 1983. 37–39.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i>. San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1982.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Palimpsest</i>. New York: New Directions, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Review of John Gould Fletcher’s <i>Goblins and Pagodas</i>.” <i>Egoist</i> 3 (1916): 183.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Sea Rose.” <i>Complete Poems 1912–1944</i>. Ed. Louis L. Martz. New York: New Directions, 1983. 5.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Sheltered Garden.” <i>Complete Poems 1912–1944</i>. Ed. Louis L. Martz. New York: New Directions, 1983. 19–21.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Tribute to Freud</i>. New York: New Directions, 1974.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Trilogy</i>. 1946. New York: New Directions, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Heidegger, Martin. “The Nature of Language.” <i>On the Way to Language</i>. Trans. Peter D. Hertz. New York: HarperCollins, 1971. 57–108.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Origin of the Work of Art.” <i>Poetry, Language, Thought</i>. Trans. Albert Hofstadter. New York: HarperCollins, 1971. 15–76.</p>

      <p class="rf">Hilder, Jamie. “‘After All One Must Know More than One Sees and One Does Not See a Cube in Its Entirety’: Gertrude Stein and Picasso and Cubism.” <i>Critical Survey</i> 17.1 (2005): 66–84.</p>

      <p class="rf">Hintz, Evelyn J. “Hart Crane’s ‘Voyages’ Reconsidered.” <i>Contemporary Literature</i> 13.3 (1972): 315–333.</p>

      <p class="rf">Hollenberg, Donna Krolik. “Introduction: ‘A Whole Deracinated Epoch.’” <i>Between History and Poetry: The Letters of H.D. and Norman Holmes Pearson</i>. Ed. Hollenberg. Iowa City: U of Iowa P, 1997. 1–15.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p188"></a>Homer. <i>The Iliad</i>. Trans. Richmond Lattimore. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1951.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>The Odyssey</i>. Trans. Robert Fagles. New York: Penguin, 1996.</p>

      <p class="rf">Hughes, Glenn. “Note.” <i>Imagist Anthology 1930</i>. New York: Heinemann, 1929. 12.</p>

      <p class="rf">Huyssen, Andreas. <i>After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism</i>. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1986.</p>

      <p class="rf">Irigaray, Luce. “The Path toward the Other.” <i>Beckett after Beckett</i>. Ed. S.&nbsp;E. Gontarski and Anthony Uhlmann. Gainesville: UP of Florida, 2006. 39–51.</p>

      <p class="rf">Jaffe, Aaron. <i>Modernism and the Culture of Celebrity</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Jarrell, Randall. <i>Kipling, Auden and Co.: Essays and Reviews, 1935–1964</i>. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1980.</p>

      <p class="rf">Jay, Martin. <i>Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought</i>. Berkeley: U of California P, 1993.</p>

      <p class="rf">Jones, Steve. <i>The Language of Genes</i>. New York: Doubleday, 1995.</p>

      <p class="rf">Joyce, James. <i>Dubliners: A Norton Critical Edition</i>. Ed. Margot Norris. New York: Norton, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kac, Eduardo. <i>Genesis</i>. March 2014. <a class="url" href="http://www.ekac.org/geninfo2.htmlKac">http://www.ekac.org/geninfo2.htmlKac</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Life Transformation—Art Mutation.” <i>Educating Artists for the Future: Learning at the Intersection of Art, Science, Technology and Culture</i>. Ed. Mel Alexenberg. Bristol, UK: Intellect Books, 2008. 203–216.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kantanski, Amelia V. <i>Learning to Write “Indian”: The Boarding School Experience and American Indian Literature</i>. Norman: U of Oklahoma P, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kenner, Hugh. <i>The Pound Era</i>. Berkeley: U of California P, 1973.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kern, Stephen. <i>The Culture of Time and Space, 1880–1915</i>. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf"><i>King Kong</i>. Dir. Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack. Perf. Fay Wray and Robert Armstrong. Warner Brothers, 1933. Film.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kittay, Eva Feder. “Dependency, Equality, and Welfare.” <i>Feminist Studies</i> 24.1 (1998): 32–43.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Love’s Labor: Essays on Women, Equality, and Dependency</i>. New York: Routledge, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kleege, Georgina. <i>Sight Unseen</i>. New Haven: Yale UP, 1999.</p>

      <p class="rf">Krentz, Christopher. “The Camera as Printing Press: How Film Has Influenced ASL Literature.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. 51–70.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Writing Deafness: The Hearing Line in Nineteenth-Century American Literature</i>. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Kroeber, Karl. <i>Retelling/Rereading</i>: <i>The Fate of Storytelling in Modern Times</i>. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">Leick, Karen. <i>Gertrude Stein and the Making of an American Celebrity</i>. New York: Routledge, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p189"></a>Lemke, Sieglinde. <i>Primitivist Modernism: Black Culture and the Origins of Transatlantic Modernism</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Leonardo da Vinci. <i>Treatise on Painting</i>. Vol. 1. Trans. Philip McMahon. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1956.</p>

      <p class="rf">Levinas, Emmanuel. <i>Entre Nous: On Thinking-of-the-Other</i>. Trans. Michael B. Smith and Barbara Harshav. New York: Columbia UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Humanism of the Other</i>. Trans. Nidra Poller. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Lewontin, Richard, and Richard Levins. <i>Biology under the Influence: Dialectical Essays on Ecology, Agriculture and Health</i>. New York: Monthly Review P, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">Lilly, Paul R., Jr. “Caddy and Addie: Speakers of Faulkner’s Impeccable Language.” <i>Journal of Narrative Technique</i> 3.3 (1973): 170–182.</p>

      <p class="rf">Lowell, Amy. “Preface to <i>Some Imagist Poets</i>.” <i>Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry</i>. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. Ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair. New York: Norton, 2003. 926–927.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Spring Day.” <i>The Complete Poetical Works of Amy Lowell</i>. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1925. 145–147.</p>

      <p class="rf">Mao, Douglas, and Rebecca L. Walkowitz, eds. <i>Bad Modernisms</i>. Durham: Duke UP, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Marinetti, Filippo Tomaso. “The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism 1909.” <i>Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents</i>. Ed. Vassiliki Kolocotroni, Jane Goldman, and Olga Taxidou. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1998. 249–253.</p>

      <p class="rf">Masters, Edgar Lee. <i>Spoon River Anthology</i>. 1915. New York: Dover, 1992.</p>

      <p class="rf">McCabe, Susan. <i>Cinematic Modernism: Modernist Poetry and Film</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf">McCaskill, Carolyn, Ceil Lucas, Robert Bayley, and Joseph Christopher Hill. <i>The Hidden Treasure of Black ASL: Its History and Structure</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">McGann, Jerome. <i>Black Riders: The Visible Language of Modernism</i>. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1993.</p>

      <p class="rf">McRuer, Robert. <i>Crip Theory: Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability</i>. New York: New York UP, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Mencken, H.&nbsp;L. <i>The American Language: An Inquiry into the Development of English in the United States</i>. 4th ed. New York: Knopf, 1984.</p>

      <p class="rf">Mesch, Johanna. <i>Tactile Sign Language</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2002.</p>

      <p class="rf">Meyer, William E.&nbsp;H., Jr. “Faulkner, Hemingway, et al.: The Emersonian Test of American Authorship.” <i>Journal of American Culture</i> 21.1 (1998): 35–42.</p>

      <p class="rf">Miller, Joshua L. <i>Accented America: The Cultural Politics of Multilingual Modernism</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">Mitchell, David T., and Sharon L. Snyder. <i>Narrative Prosthesis: Disability and the Dependencies of Discourse</i>. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2000.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p190"></a>Mitchell, W.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;T. <i>Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Preface: Utopian Gestures.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. xv–xxviii.</p>

      <p class="rf"><i>Modern Times</i>. Dir. Charlie Chaplin. United Artists, 1936. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Morrison, Toni. <i>Lecture and Speech of Acceptance, upon the Award of the Nobel Prize for Literature, Delivered in Stockholm on the Seventh of December, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three</i>. New York: Knopf, 1993.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Playing in the Dark</i>: <i>Whiteness and the Literary Imagination</i>. New York: Vintage Books, 1993.</p>

      <p class="rf">Myklebust, Helmer R. <i>Psychology of Deafness: Sensory Deprivation, Learning, and Adjustment</i>. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1957.</p>

      <p class="rf">National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institute of Health. “Human Genome Project.” March 2014. <a class="url" href="http://report.nih.gov/NIHfactsheets/ViewFactSheet.aspx?csid=45&amp;key=H#H">http://report.nih.gov/NIHfactsheets/ViewFactSheet.aspx?csid=45&amp;key=H#H</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">New, Elisa. “Hand of Fire: Crane.” <i>The Regenerate Lyric: Theology and Innovation in American Poetry</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1993. 182–263.</p>

      <p class="rf">Nietzsche, Jane Chance. <i>The Genius Figure in Antiquity and the Middle Ages</i>. New York: Columbia UP, 1975.</p>

      <p class="rf">North, Michael. <i>The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language and Twentieth-Century Literature</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1994.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Novelty: A History of the New</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2013.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Reading 1922: A Return to the Scene of the Modern</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999.</p>

      <p class="rf">Oliver, Kelly. “Subjectivity as Responsivity: The Ethical Implications of Dependency.” <i>The Subject of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency</i>. Ed. Eva Feder Kittay and Ellen K. Feder. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002. 322–333.</p>

      <p class="rf">Oppen, George. “Of Being Numerous.” <i>George Oppen: Selected Poems</i>. Ed. Robert Creeley. New York: New Directions, 2001. 83–109.</p>

      <p class="rf">Padden, Carol. <i>Interaction of Morphology and Syntax in American Sign Language</i>. New York: Garland, 1988.</p>

      <p class="rf">Padden, Carol, and Tom Humphries. <i>Deaf in America: Voices from a Culture</i>. Cambridge, Harvard UP, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Inside Deaf Culture</i>. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Perloff, Marjorie. <i>The Poetics of Indeterminacy: Rimbaud to Cage</i>. Evanston, IL: Northwestern UP, 1999.</p>

      <p class="rf">Peters, Cynthia. <i>Deaf American Literature: From Carnival to the Canon</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2000.</p>

      <p class="rf">Peucker, Brigitte. <i>Incorporating Images: Film and the Rival Arts</i>. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1995.</p>

      <p class="rf">Plato. <i>Cratylus</i>. Trans. C.&nbsp;D.&nbsp;C. Reeve. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p191"></a>Poizner, Howard, Edward S. Klima, and Ursula Bellugi. <i>What the Hands Reveal about the Brain</i>. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987.</p>

      <p class="rf">Pound, Ezra. <i>The Cantos</i>. New York: New Directions, 1996.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Date Line.” <i>Literary Essays of Ezra Pound</i>. Ed. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot. New York: New Directions, 1918. 74–87.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Hugh Selwyn Mauberly.” <i>Norton Anthology of Modern Poetry</i>. 3rd ed. Ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair. New York: Norton, 2003. 354–366.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “In a Station of the Metro.” <i>Norton Anthology of Modern Poetry</i>. 3rd ed. Ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair. New York: Norton, 2003. 351.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>The Letters of Ezra Pound to Margaret Anderson: The Little Review Correspondence</i>. Ed. Thomas L. Scott and Melvin J. Friedman. New York: New Directions, 1988.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Retrospect.” <i>Literary Essays of Ezra Pound</i>. Ed. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot. New York: New Directions, 1918. 3–14.</p>

      <p class="rf">Powell, Charles. “So Much Waste Paper.” <i>Manchester Guardian</i> 31 October 1923: 7.</p>

      <p class="rf">Pro-Tactile: The DeafBlind Way. Home page. 2013. <a class="url" href="http://www.protactile.org/">http://www.protactile.org/</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rainey, Lawrence. <i>Institutions of Modernism: Literary Elites and Public Culture</i>. New Haven: Yale UP, 1998.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rée, Jonathan. <i>I See a Voice: Deafness, Language, and the Senses—A Philosophical History</i>. New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rennie, Debbie. “Missing Children.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Riddel, Joseph. “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Failure.” <i>ELH</i> 33.4 (1966): 473–496.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rives, Rochelle. <i>Modernist Impersonalities: Affect, Authority, and the Subject</i>. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rony, Fatimah Tobing. <i>The Third Eye: Race, Cinema, and Ethnographic Spectacle</i>. Durham: Duke UP, 1996.</p>

      <p class="rf">Roosevelt, Theodore. “Americanism.” <i>Works of Theodore Roosevelt: Memorial Edition</i>. Vol. 20. New York: Scribner, 1926. 464–465.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rose, Heidi M. “The Poet in the Poem in the Performance: The Relation of Body, Self, and Text in ASL Literature.” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>. Ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose. Berkeley: U of California P, 2006. 130–146.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rose, Phyllis. <i>Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker in Her Time</i>. New York: Random House, 1989.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rosner, Mary, and T.&nbsp;R. Johnson. “Telling Stories: Metaphors of the Human Genome Project.” <i>Hypatia</i> 10.4 (1995): 104–129.</p>

      <p class="rf">Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, and Johann Gottfried Herder. <i>On the Origin of Language</i>. Trans. John H. Moran and Alexander Gode. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1986.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p192"></a>Rubin, Joan Shelley. <i>Songs of Ourselves: The Uses of Poetry in America</i>. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2007.</p>

      <p class="rf">Russell, Emily. <i>Reading Embodied Citizenship: Disability, Narrative, and the American Body Politic</i>. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 2011.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sacks, Ethan. “Coca Cola’s ‘America the Beautiful’ Super Bowl Commercial Angers Conservative Pundits.” <i>New York Daily News</i> 3 February 2014. <a class="url" href="http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/coca-cola-super-bowl-ad-angers-conservatives-article-1.1600849">http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/coca-cola-super-bowl-ad-angers-conservatives-article-1.1600849</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sacks, Oliver. <i>Seeing Voices</i>. New York: Random House, 2000.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sanchez, Rebecca. “‘Human Bodies Are Words’: Towards a Theory of Non-verbal Voice.” <i>College English Association Critic</i> 73.3 (2012): 32–46.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sartre, Jean-Paul. “On <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>: Time in the World of Faulkner.” <i>The Sound and the Fury: A Norton Critical Edition</i>. 2nd ed. Ed. David Minter. New York: Norton, 1994. 265–271.</p>

      <p class="rf">Saussure, Ferdinand de. <i>Course in General Linguistics</i>. Ed. Perry Meisel and Haun Saussy. Trans. Wade Baskin. Peru, IL: Open Court, 1972.</p>

      <p class="rf">Schepp, James W. <i>Shepp’s New York City Illustrated</i>. Chicago: Globe Bible Publishing Company, 1894.</p>

      <p class="rf">Schmitz, Neil. “Gertrude Stein as Post-Modernist: The Rhetoric of ‘Tender Buttons.’” <i>Journal of Modern Literature</i> 3.5 (1974): 1203–1218.</p>

      <p class="rf">Shakespeare, Tom. “The Social Model of Disability.” <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>. 3rd ed. Ed. Lennard J. Davis. New York: Routledge, 2010. 266–273.</p>

      <p class="rf">Shakespeare, William. <i>Macbeth: Folger Edition</i>. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">“Shantih, Shantih, Shantih: Has the Reader Any Rights before the Bar of Literature?” <i>Time</i> 3 March 1923: 12.</p>

      <p class="rf">Siebers, Tobin. <i>Disability Theory</i>. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sitney, P. Adams. <i>Modernist Montage: The Obscurity of Vision in Cinema and Literature</i>. New York: Columbia UP, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">Smith, Edward P. <i>Annual Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to the Secretary of the Interior</i>. Washington, DC: United States Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1874.</p>

      <p class="rf">Snyder, Charles. “Clarence John Blake and Alexander Graham Bell: Otology and the Telephone.” <i>Analysis of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology</i> 83.4 (1974): 30.</p>

      <p class="rf">Snyder, Sharon L., and David T. Mitchell. <i>Cultural Locations of Disability</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Solomon, Bill. “The Novel in Distress.” <i>Novel</i> 43.1 (2010): 120–131.</p>

      <p class="rf"><i>Sound and Fury</i>. Dir. Josh Aronson. Docurama, 2002. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sowell, James William. “The Oralist.” <i>Deaf American Poetry: An Anthology</i>. Ed. John Lee Clark. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2009. 88.</p>

      <p class="rf">Stein, Gertrude. <i>The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas</i>. 3rd ed. New York: Vintage, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p193"></a>———. “Composition as Explanation.” <i>Stein: Writings 1903–1932</i>. New York: Library of America, 1998. 520–529.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Everybody’s Autobiography</i>. New York: Exact Change, 2004.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Picasso</i>. New York: Dover, 1984.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Portraits and Repetition.” <i>Stein: Writings 1932–1946</i>. New York: Library of America, 1998. 287–312.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Tender Buttons</i>. <i>Stein: Writings 1932–1946</i>. New York: Library of America, 1998. 313–355.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Transatlantic Interview.” <i>The Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry</i>. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. Ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair. New York: Norton, 2003. 987–993.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sterne, Jonathan. <i>The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction</i>. Durham: Duke UP, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">Stewart, George R. “‘Each in Its Ordered Place’: Structure and Narrative in ‘Benjy’s Section’ of <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.” <i>American Literature</i> 29.4 (1958): 440–456.</p>

      <p class="rf">Stokoe, William. <i>A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic Principles</i>. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 1965.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Syntactic Dimensionality: Language in Four Dimensions.” Paper presented at the New York Academy of Sciences, 1979.</p>

      <p class="rf">Suarez, Juan A. “T.&nbsp;S. Eliot’s <i>The Waste Land</i>, the Gramophone, and the Modernist Discourse Network.” <i>New Literary History</i> 32.3 (2001): 747–768.</p>

      <p class="rf">Sweeney, Carole. <i>From Fetish to Subject: Race, Modernism, and Primitivism, 1919–1935</i>. New York: Praeger, 2004.</p>

      <p class="rf">Taylor, Alan. <i>Writing Early American History</i>. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2006.</p>

      <p class="rf">Thompson, Rosemarie Garland. <i>Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in American Culture and Literature</i>. New York: Columbia UP, 1997.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. Introduction. <i>Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body</i>. Ed. Thompson. New York: New York UP, 1996.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Staring: How We Look</i>. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009.</p>

      <p class="rf">Tocqueville, Alexis de. <i>Democracy in America</i>. New York: Penguin, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">U.S. Bureau of the Census. <i>Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970</i>. Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975.</p>

      <p class="rf">Valli, Clayton. “Dew on a Spiderweb.” Signed by Ella Mae Lentz. <i>ASL Poetry: Selected Works of Clayton Valli</i>. San Diego: Dawn Pictures, 1995. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Tears of Life.” <i>ASL Poetry: Selected Works of Clayton Valli</i>. San Diego: Dawn Pictures, 1995. DVD.</p>

      <p class="rf">Valli, Clayton, Ceil Lucas, and Kristin J. Mulrooney. <i>Linguistics of American Sign Language: An Introduction</i>. 4th ed. Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2005.</p>

      <p class="rf">Veditz, George. “The Preservation of Sign Language.” Trans. Carol Padden and Eric Malzkuhn. <i>Deaf World: A Historical Reader and Sourcebook</i>. Ed. Lois Bragg. New York: New York UP, 2001. 83–85.</p>

      <p class="rf"><a class="page" id="p194"></a>Whitehouse, David. “Scientists Hail New ‘Map of Life.’” BBC News. 20 November 2003. <a class="url" href="http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3223318.stm">http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3223318.stm</a>.</p>

      <p class="rf">Whitman, Walt. <i>Leaves of Grass 1855</i>. <i>Walt Whitman: Complete Poetry and Collected Prose</i>. New York: Library of America, 1982. 27–145.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “A Song of the Rolling Earth.” <i>Walt Whitman: Complete Poetry and Collected Prose</i>. New York: Library of America, 1982. 362–368.</p>

      <p class="rf">Widdemer, Margaret. “The Legend of Amy Lowell.” <i>Texas Quarterly</i> 2 (1963): 193–200.</p>

      <p class="rf">Williams, William Carlos. <i>The Autobiography of William Carlos Williams</i>. New York: New Directions, 1967.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “The Great Figure.” <i>Selected Poems</i>. Ed. Charles Tomlinson. New York: New Directions, 1985. 36.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>Paterson</i>. New York: New Directions, 1992.</p>

      <p class="rf">Wilson, James C. “(Re)Writing the Genetic Body-Text: Disability, Textuality, and the Human Genome Project.” <i>Cultural Critique</i> 50 (2002): 23–39.</p>

      <p class="rf">Wilson, Sarah. <i>Melting-Pot Modernism</i>. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2010.</p>

      <p class="rf">Woll, Bencie. “Perspectives on Linearity and Simultaneity.” <i>Simultaneity in Signed Languages: Form and Function</i>. Ed. Myriam Vermeerbergen, Lorraine Leeson, and Onno A. Crasborn. New York: John Benjamins, 2007. 337–344.</p>

      <p class="rf">Woolf, Virginia. <i>Mrs. Dalloway</i>. San Diego: Harcourt, 1981.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “Pictures.” <i>The Essays of Virginia Woolf: 1925–1928</i>. Ed. Andrew McNeillie. London: Hogarth, 1994. 243–247.</p>

      <p class="rf">Yeats, W.&nbsp;B. “Among School Children.” <i>The Collected Poems of W.&nbsp;B. Yeats</i>. 2nd ed. Ed. Richard J. Finneran. New York: Scribner, 1989. 215–217.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. <i>A Vision</i>. New York: Kessinger, 2003.</p>

      <p class="rf">Yingling, Thomas. <i>Hart Crane and the Homosexual Text: New Thresholds, New Anatomies</i>. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1990.</p>

      <p class="rf">———. “<i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> and the End of Collective Experience.” <i>New Essays on Winesburg, Ohio</i>. Ed. John W. Crowley. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 1990. 99–128.</p>

      <p class="rf">Zenders, Karl F. “Faulkner and the Power of Sound.” <i>PMLA</i> 99.1 (1984): 89–108.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
