<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="ch05">
    <h1 class="cn"><a class="page" id="p121"></a> <a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">4. The Image: Cinematic Poetics and Deaf Vision</a></h1>

    <p class="pf">The work of Crane, Stein, Williams, and Demuth demonstrates how knowledge of actual visual and embodied languages allows us to make a surprising link between the concrete (the material body) and the abstract (the indeterminacy that languages in the visual mode deploy). This connection turns out to be very useful in understanding some of the competing ways images were thought of at the beginning of the twentieth century. In this chapter, I continue exploring what ASL might contribute to an ontology of the linguistic image by focusing on the qualities of movement and temporality and argue that the expanded description of the image suggested by such an ontology enables us to reconsider classifications of modernist works, specifically the apparent abandonment of imagism by H.D. and the supposed emphasis of sonority over vision in William Faulkner’s <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en348" id="en348r">1</a></p>

    <p>While I continue to focus primarily on understandings of the image specific to the context of modernist art and writing, considerations of what emerges in the spaces where words intersect with images are highly relevant to broader discussions of the visual culture we inhabit and the visual literacies it demands.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en349" id="en349r">2</a> Despite the prevalence of images in our society and the significant role they play in shaping our culture, as W.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;T Mitchell argues in his groundbreaking study <i>Picture Theory</i>, “we still do not know exactly what pictures are, what their relation to language is.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en350" id="en350r">3</a> This is a discussion, I argue, to which ASL can provide crucially relevant perspectives. ASL itself has long been seen, at times reductively, as a language of pictures. The fundamentally visual way in <a class="page" id="p122"></a>which most deaf individuals process language has had, as I discussed in chapter 3, specific effects on the development of ASL’s grammar.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en351" id="en351r">4</a> It has also influenced the culture that has developed around this language. As the former president of the National Association of the Deaf and early sign language filmmaker George W. Veditz declared in 1910, “[Deaf people] are first, last and of all time the people of the eye.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en352" id="en352r">5</a> The literature of this “people of the eye” provides a reservoir of knowledge about the potential cultural and linguistic meanings of the image that can help illuminate modernists’ own negotiations with these questions.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0501">Modernist Images</h2>

    <div class="epigraph">
      <p class="ep"><i>The age demanded an image</i></p>

      <p class="ep"><i>Of its accelerated grimace</i>—Ezra Pound, “Hugh Selwyn Mauberly”</p>
    </div>

    <p class="paft">Like most deaf people, modernists tended to identify their culture as a visual one, and many took a specific interest in the ways this impacted language use and aesthetics. We get some sense of the extent of writers’ emphasis on the visual in the wide range of ways they attempted to represent ideas about vision in textual form. From the handcrafted texts of small outfits such as Cuala Press (which incorporated decoration to call readers’ attention to the materiality of the works) to typographical experimentation such as that of book III of William Carlos Williams’s <i>Paterson</i> (which produced a similar effect through the manipulation of the visual arrangement of words on the page) to concrete poetry (which turned these arrangements into pictures) to the development of techniques such as montage (which famously borrowed ideas about transitions and cutting from the cinema), much experimental modernist aesthetic practice probed the implications suggested by new technologies on the relationship between words and images.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en353" id="en353r">6</a> Despite the widespread recognition of the significance of images to literary practice, however, people had radically divergent ideas about what images were and how they produced meaning.</p>

    <p>One approach to the image developed out of a long tradition of associating visual images with truth and knowledge. As demonstrated by the etymologies of terms such as “enlightenment” or the fact that “seeing something with one’s own eyes” has long held a privileged status as a means of acquiring knowledge, an ontological status has tended to be transferred to objects visually perceived; we can see them, therefore they are real.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en354" id="en354r">7</a> This association between truth and sight has ancient roots. As Adriana Cavarero explains, “Greek philosophy understands <a class="page" id="p123"></a>thought—and therefore the entire realm of truth that lies in its purview—in terms of vision, . . . a stable, immobile, objective world that lies in front of us.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en355" id="en355r">8</a> And this privileged status of that which we can see has shaped a diverse array of cultural practices and beliefs, from the scientific revolution’s investment in visible evidence to the use of visual surveillance to determine the “truth” of bodies as chronicled by Michel Foucault. In the post-Enlightenment world, “visible” has become a near synonym for “verifiable.”</p>

    <p>To secure this verifiability, the images that appear in the field of vision are imagined as “stable,” “immobile,” and “objective”; they are singular and precise. Behind these descriptions lies the assumption that there is such a thing as “stable,” “immobile,” and “objective” truth to which vision gives us access. It was such truths, fixed before our eyes, that photography seemed to present. Originally invented in the eighteenth century by Thomas Wedgewood and developed throughout the nineteenth, it was in the twentieth century that photography became inexpensive enough to be available to the masses. George Eastman’s 1901 Kodak Brownie enabled people without specialist training to preserve images. The widespread use of such devices enabled a prosthetic extension of the eye, as it could see, apparently for itself, visual records of people and places brought back from around the world. These developments also had a major impact on the establishment of academic fields such as anthropology, which was distinguished from other areas of study around the same time precisely through its emphasis on direct observation, the primacy it afforded to documentary visual evidence.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en356" id="en356r">9</a></p>

    <p>One of the key ways in which these circulating images impacted modernist writing was related to how they appeared to disrupt linear temporality. The word “photography” itself suggests a kind of written image, a writing of light that preserved a moment in time, held in stasis, removed from the processes of entropy. Snapshots such as those offered by the Brownie enabled viewers to see time appearing to stand still. It was this sense of the fragmentation of time that attracted Ezra Pound to the visual image as he thought about new approaches to poetry. In “A Retrospect,” the essay in which he most extensively lays out his understanding of imagism, he defines “an Image [as] that which presents an intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en357" id="en357r">10</a> In the same way that both photographic and later cinematic vision involve compressing an image onto a two-dimensional plane, Pound was interested in condensation, a preference he emphasized with his insistence that such poetry involve “direct treatment of the ‘thing’” and “use absolutely no word that does not contribute to the presentation.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en358" id="en358r">11</a></p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p124"></a>For Pound, such dictums were an attempt to direct modernist verse away from aspects of symbolist writing he perceived as overly florid and out of step with the speed and steel of the modern world. Imagist poetry was to be “harder and saner, . . . ‘nearer the bone.’ It will be as much like granite as it can be, its force will lie in it truth, . . . austere, direct, free from emotional slither.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en359" id="en359r">12</a> “Emotional slither” is intended as a dig at the kind of nineteenth-century poetry Pound wanted to distinguish himself and his cohort from, but it also links this new kind of poetry—and its understanding of the image—to a lack of movement, something that does not slither, that is “harder,” more specific, more still. As Pound put it, “It will be as much like granite as it can be,” and this stability and hardness would be linked to its accuracy: “its force will lie in its truth.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en360" id="en360r">13</a> Imagist poetry, like many people’s interpretation of the photographic image, sought to access truth by freezing a visual image in an instant of time.</p>

    <p>While on the surface this account of images appears dialectically opposed to that of the period’s next major development in visual technology, the cinema, moving pictures (or “series production,” as Stein referred to them) were in fact just series of such images; looked at carefully, motion pictures were really discrete snapshots, fragments, that had been run through a projector quickly enough to create the illusion of movement.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en361" id="en361r">14</a> On the screen, a medium that always already flattened the images it represented, scenes were further broken into bits by jump cuts, and bodies were fragmented as the camera zoomed in or out or as scenes cut from one to the next.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en362" id="en362r">15</a> Such disjunction, based on the recognition of a series of discrete images, provided an irresistible parallel for writers interested in incorporating the visual into their work to the turbulent and rapidly changing world that Marshall Berman, quoting Karl Marx, describes as an environment in which “all that is solid melts into air.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en363" id="en363r">16</a></p>

    <p>This idea of the image as granite and stable represented one approach to vision, one that was directly linked to the development of imagist verse. As both modern and contemporary cultural commentators have noted, however, this was not the only set of ideas in circulation regarding the meaning of the visual image and how it might be linked to language. If images were privileged through a belief that associated them with truth, the very fact of their exponential proliferation seemed to undermine the link. Martin Jay makes precisely this argument in his influential <i>Downcast Eyes</i>, in which he provides a genealogy of vision from ancient Greece to modern France, describing the modern period as marking a shift <i>away</i> from what he terms the “scopic regime” of Cartesian perspectivism, a concept he uses to link Renaissance ideas about perspective with Cartesian notions of subjective <a class="page" id="p125"></a>rationality that privileged vision as a means to acquire truth. By contrast, he argues, in France in particular, modernity witnessed a turn away from occularcentricity and toward “a profound suspicion of vision and its hegemonic role.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en364" id="en364r">17</a></p>

    <p>Michael North makes a similar argument in <i>Reading 1922</i>, in which he points to the very proliferation of images, the thing that would seem to make the age more occularcentric, as evidence of their ontological instability. As he contends, “Newer and more powerful media simply made audiences more aware than ever of the fact of mediation. In so doing, they accomplished for a vast public what philosophy, anthropology, and psychology were accomplishing for an intellectual elite.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en365" id="en365r">18</a> For North, this realization is at the root of modernist literature’s characteristic self-reflexivity. If photographs and then film enabled people to extend the reach of their eyes, the constant technological presence also made them increasingly aware of the process that went into producing that image; even as such images appeared to provide access to the real, they deconstructed the notion of a real by blurring the lines between fact and manipulation, by demonstrating that something could appear other than it was.</p>

    <p>As Stein observed in her book-length portrait of Pablo Picasso, “the truth that the things seen with the eyes are the only real things, had lost its significance.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en366" id="en366r">19</a> Her own approach to vision, as I illustrated in chapter 3, involved challenging what we mean by sight, fragmenting the subject of our gaze in ways that call attention to the conventionality of our usual methods of looking. Like cubist paintings, which aspired to provide more realistic images by showing them from multiple perspectives at once, such self-reflexive works denaturalize sight. The proliferation of visual images, according to this argument, achieved precisely the opposite effect of making them “stable, immobile, [and] objective,” of converting them into truths “nearer the bone.” It is this apparent contradiction that has kept the visual approaches of H.D. and Gertrude Stein from being read in relation to each other, despite a number of significant similarities.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en367" id="en367r">20</a> Because of the artificial binary created between these models of visual poetics (collapsed in an instant versus extended in time, hard versus fluid, granite versus indefinite), Stein came to be associated with greater complexity and an enhanced ability to speak to the complex political realities of modernity.</p>

    <p>In a study of the modernist long poem, a genre associated with this latter set of characteristics, Margaret Dickie explains that such works appeared more engaged with the world because they were “openly <a class="page" id="p126"></a>didactic. . . . The poets set out to teach not necessarily difficult lessons, but simple precepts that required new and complex forms of expression responsive to the conditions of the modern world.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en368" id="en368r">21</a> In contrast to the sweeping social and political pronouncements of longer works, earlier poems seemed small and bounded, even escapist. This shifting preference led to a movement away from the short verses that had dominated early experimental modernism and toward longer works such as <i>The Cantos</i>, <i>Paterson</i>, and <i>Trilogy</i>. These later texts presented themselves as “poem[s] including history,” to borrow Pound’s definition of “epic,” suggesting that their earlier experimental forms were not up to this task.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en369" id="en369r">22</a> It was, in other words, the fact that epics were apparently better suited to presenting ideas that were extended in time that made them seem more relevant. History is context; it is an understanding of the story across time. Snapshots and the poetic styles associated with them purport to freeze a single instant, while epic works off the notion of protraction. Despite what seems to be a neat division, however, both movement and temporal expansion, key components of writing aimed at including history, are actually present in visual poems. ASL provides us with a way of reconciling both these versions of what images are, especially in the spaces where they interact with language.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0502">Dewdrops and Moon Beams</h2>

    <p class="paft">While a great deal of early research into ASL had the aim of establishing its similarities to spoken or written language for the very pragmatic reason that it was frequently dismissed as not being a “real” language at all, what is most interesting about ASL is precisely what it does not share with other modes of language. Because of the visual nature of ASL poetry, it has the ability to produce four-dimensional words and images that link aspects of each of the apparently contradictory interpretations of images described earlier. To be clear, ASL is not a pictorial or iconographic language. As in other languages, words (signs) are comprised of smaller abstract units similar to phonemes in spoken languages. The ways in which aesthetic uses of ASL manipulate images, however, provides insight into how we might think about the possibilities of imagistic language more broadly.</p>

    <p>Nearly as long as there has been formal analysis of ASL grammar, it has been described as cinematic. As William Stokoe, the Gallaudet linguist credited with formally establishing that ASL was a complete language in his 1965 <i>A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic</i> <a class="page" id="p127"></a><i>Principles</i>, explained, “In a signed language . . . narrative is no longer linear and prosaic. Instead, the essence of sign language is to cut from a normal view to a close-up to a distance shot to a close-up again, and so on, even including flashback and flash-forward scenes, exactly as a movie editor works. Not only is signing itself arranged more like edited film than like written narration, but also each sign is placed very much as a camera: the field of vision and angle of view are directed but variable.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en370" id="en370r">23</a> Images within ASL can be presented from varying perspectives analogous to camera angles. As I explained in my discussion of the Flying Word Project’s “Poetry” in chapter 1, the signer can zoom in or out of a particular scene or sign. These perspectives can be stitched together employing methods that parallel those of editing; H-Dirksen L. Bauman identifies dialogue editing, parallel editing, and cutaway as specific film techniques that appear in ASL.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en371" id="en371r">24</a> They can be made to run fast or presented in slow motion, as demonstrated in Austin Andrew’s “Deaf Ninja,” in which the slow-motion establishing shots of the ninja’s positions and individual falling raindrops are intercut with much faster frenetic movements of his fight.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en372" id="en372r">25</a></p>

    <p>As all of these techniques suggest, movement is vital to both the grammar and vocabulary of ASL, a dynamic most readily observable in its poetry. To begin to analyze the thematic implications of this movement, I look at a poem that perhaps comes closest to the ideas about imagism expressed by Pound; it presents an image without interpretation, using “absolutely no word that does not contribute to the presentation,” as Pound describes in “A Retrospect.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en373" id="en373r">26</a> Indeed, in this regard, it surpasses even his briefest imagist poem, “In a Station of the Metro”—“The apparition of these faces in the crowd / Petals on a wet black bough”—in which “apparition” introduces a subjective (and interpretive) framework through which the image that Pound presents is read (associating it with death, the underworld, Persephone, immateriality).<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en374" id="en374r">27</a></p>

    <p>In Bernard Bragg’s “Flowers and Moonlight on the Spring Water,” by contrast, the body of the poem consists of nothing but the images. Rather than direct us toward the context in which we are meant to read it, Bragg uses the relationship between the title and the body of the poem to open a space for contemplating the ontology of the linguistic image itself. He begins by signing the title, which he renders in signed English as follows: Quotation marks flower m-o-o-n-l-i-g-h-t on spring river.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en375" id="en375r">28</a> Translated into English, the poem’s title is perhaps the closest approximation of its contents, but the difference is striking; it demonstrates the distinction between describing a visual image, as the <a class="page" id="p128"></a>tile does, and presenting or enacting it. As the poem begins, the signer looks up as night falls, the sign for River emerging from the sign for Evening. “River,” as opposed to “water,” renders the vague image more precise. Spring flowers grow from the landscape. The moonlight rides along the ripples of the water as reflections of the stars twinkle around it, before both light and water fade off into the distance.</p>

    <p>The brief poem is, as Bragg explains in his introduction to it, “so very visual.” It presents, in deceptive simplicity, a cluster of associated images. Framed by the opening temporal marker of night, it then introduces a series of nouns that interact with one another: the moon, the stars, flowers, the river. What is notably absent from this account is description. The poem consists of no adjectives, nor does it append additional information to that which the title provided. Instead, it uses the relationality of these nouns, along with verbs: (night) falling, (flowers) blooming, (moonlight) riding, and (stars) twinkling on the water as it flows. Repeatedly, the poem connects visual images with action and movement. Unlike the moving pictures of the cinema, however, here motion is no trick but rather is a fundamental element of the being of both the poem’s words and, it suggests, the objects they represent.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en376" id="en376r">29</a></p>

    <p>As well as through the verbs that constitute the poem’s most memorable visuals, the action that is the signing of the poem—the signer’s hands moving through space as he produces the signs—creates a connection between them that becomes part of the meaning of the image. Night is not a static backdrop for the poem; it actively falls on the river that emerges from it as though the two were linked, as though this specific river only comes into being as a result of the fall of night, its being in flux like Stein’s continuous present. Similarly, the flowers bloom, as though they too owe their existence to nightfall. The river flows, the light from the moon and stars glittering across its rippled surface as it moves along. Nothing in this still life is actually still; all of the poem’s nouns are characterized by action.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en377" id="en377r">30</a> It is this action that produces the piece’s aesthetic pleasure—the round fullness of the flowers swelling, the delicate shimmer of light.</p>

    <p>“Flowers and Moonlight” also demonstrates another aspect inherent in signed languages such as ASL: their mimetic potential. Representational art has long had a problem with dimensions, specifically the fact that the canvas (or the film screen or the parchment) has fewer of them to work with than does the subject it depicts. The significance of this seemingly trivial observation can be observed most clearly in the history of trompe l’oeil art, which aspires to mimetic realism through a deception <a class="page" id="p129"></a>of the eye intended to make it perceive more dimensions than are actually present.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en378" id="en378r">31</a> As a visual, embodied art form, ASL literature escapes this problem, operating in the same number of dimensions as the things it represents. Signs themselves have presence; they move through time and space, they can be seen and felt. The different kinds of light produce textured patterns on the ripples of the water. The flowers swell and have shape that can be read tactilely.</p>

    <p>This presence does not, of course, mean that literal flowers or rivers magically burst into existence as the poet signs. But if the signs do not produce <i>the</i> real, they do produce <i>a</i> real; the words possess a multidimensional presence that impacts the way visual poetics engages temporality. The first sign of the poem marks the time, but it, like the rest of the piece, is already in motion. Night moves, it falls on the signer’s face and the river. Like everything else in the poem, it refuses to stay still. Through this constant movement, the poem presents a challenge to ideas of the visual image (or of visual poetics) as capturing a singular moment in time. The implications of such temporal expansion are explored even further in Clayton Valli’s “Dew on a Spiderweb,” which identifies this extension as a fundamental component of ASL’s mimetic capabilities. “Dew” opens with the signer encountering a spiderweb and explaining it to viewers.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en379" id="en379r">32</a> The web emerges out of the fog on tree branches, all of which are visually (and physically) linked with the repetition of “5” and “4” handshapes. The web is backlit by the moon, which causes the dewdrops dotted across it to glisten. The speaker is enthralled with the image and addresses the audience directly to explain that she has never seen anything like it before. Desiring to preserve the image, she turns back to it with a camera, snapping photos from multiple angles.</p>

    <p>Upon opening the camera, however, she realizes that she has forgotten to wind the film. Distraught, the signer explains that the image is destroyed, that she will never see anything like it again. The assertion, however, contradicts itself. To communicate this, the signer has visually reproduced the web, identical in all but pace to the first one. The web’s image <i>has</i> been preserved, made present on the signer’s hands. More than just describing how the web looks, the signer has created a thing in the air—not identical to the web but nevertheless physically, tangibly present, no more ephemeral than the web itself.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en380" id="en380r">33</a></p>

    <p>This present-ing of the web is significant to a broader consideration of the relationship between words and images; indeed, it directly challenges assumptions about the separation between them. As W.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;T. Mitchell argues, “A verbal representation cannot represent—that is, <a class="page" id="p130"></a>make present—its object in the same way a visual representation can. It may refer to an object, describe it, invoke it, but it can never bring its visual presence before us in the way that pictures do.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en381" id="en381r">34</a> For Mitchell, this is a foundational difference between the media. But here, the web, like the flowers and river of “Flowers and Moonlight,” <i>are</i> made present, are subject to a being there in language.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en382" id="en382r">35</a></p>

    <p>Again, this presence enables a different relationship to temporality than more traditional understandings of the connection between visual images and words might allow, a relationship that the signer becomes increasingly aware of throughout the rest of the poem. The process of explaining the web’s destruction (the gap between the first and second presentations of the image) enables a self-reflexivity that causes the signer to analyze the way she has accomplished this. Whereas in the first presentation of the web, the signs pointed outward toward an (invisible) object, in the second stanza, the signer begins attempting to describe the web but realizes that she has produced it; the image becomes a thing itself, an object extended in space and time, always already disrupting the signer’s desire to capture it in a photo, to freeze it in time and press it between the pages of an album. Structurally, the presence of the physical body and the visual perception of it extends the signs in time. The final stanza of “Dew on a Spiderweb” drives home this notion, again playing on the distinction between the poem’s title—which pins down the image with a stable name—and the way the image is signed in the body of the text, requiring the signer to recognize the thingliness of the words themselves.</p>

    <p>The temporal aspect of this dynamic, marked in “Flowers and Moonlight” by the movement of night, is represented here through the different pacing of the image presentation in each stanza (normal, fast, slow).<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en383" id="en383r">36</a> The poem’s primary revelation about the nature of the linguistic image, in other words, is that operating in four dimensions enables the image produced in language to replicate many of the effects of the original image. Unlike a static image captured in the signer’s photo album, this image has dimension; it can be manipulated in space and time and therefore has a material reality that is satisfying to the signer in a way a flat image would not be even if she had remembered to wind the camera. Significantly for the purposes of analyzing modernist images, the poem demonstrates how in visual languages the ability to manipulate temporality is not opposed to a present image but rather derives from the language’s ability to produce things in the world.</p>

    <p>These features—the indeterminacy I discussed in the previous chapter, the movement and engagement with temporality I describe here—provide <a class="page" id="p131"></a>us with new and relevant ways for thinking about what visual language is and can be. In highlighting this element of visual presentation in art, ASL poetry helps reconcile the modernist fascination with the image as something inescapably tangible and present and its potential to be multifaceted, shifting, and indeterminate. Moreover, unlike other accounts that have attempted to bridge this divide, it remains attentive to actual properties of visual languages.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0503">Alternative Images</h2>

    <p class="paft">Analysis of the relationship between indeterminacy and the concrete in manual languages is especially useful in understanding the poetic movement most directly linked with the first approach to the visual image: imagism. Within early literary modernism, perhaps no approach to poetics expressed more explicit interest in the intersection between words and images than the famous (and famously short-lived) imagism. Despite the ongoing fascination with all things visual throughout the period, imagism is often undervalued, read as a less successful precursor to subsequent developments.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en384" id="en384r">37</a></p>

    <p>The story of imagism’s founding is well rehearsed: after editing H.D.’s “Hermes of the Ways,” Ezra Pound scrawled “H.D. Imagiste” at the bottom of the page before sending it to Harriet Monroe at <i>Poetry</i> for publication in 1912. The story, and the ways it has been retold, speaks to the limited lenses through which the movement was perceived from the start, namely as a marketing technique for H.D. to get published.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en385" id="en385r">38</a> This perspective on what was at stake for writers associated with the movement—H.D., Pound, Richard Aldington, F.&nbsp;L Flint—was also seen as contributing to its “failure.”</p>

    <p>As I have highlighted in Pound’s manifestos, descriptions of imagist poetry suggested that images should be presented as something fixed. Despite fierce disagreement with Pound over nearly everything else associated with the movement, this core understanding was shared by Amy Lowell, who both wrote in and did much to publicize the new style. As she describes in a preface to the 1915 <i>Some Imagist Poets</i>, imagism was about exactitude. The aim was “to present an image (hence the name: ‘Imagist’). . . . We believe that poetry should render particulars exactly and not deal in vague generalities, however magnificent and sonorous. . . . To produce poetry that is hard and clear, never blurred nor indefinite.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en386" id="en386r">39</a> To Pound’s granite, then, we may add another cluster of associated ideas: “hard and clear,” definite, rendering particulars exactly.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p132"></a>During the nineteen-teens, imagism was publicized as a fresh new approach that broke away from the verbosity that Pound found distasteful in Romantic verse. The excitement over poetry that was hard and clear, however, did not last long. Almost as soon as it emerged, the emphasis on precision started to read a bit too much like restriction, out of touch with the “variety and complexity” that Eliot identified as defining characteristics of the modern age.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en387" id="en387r">40</a> Tensions arose over both style and marketing. In the preface to <i>Some Imagist Poets</i>, Lowell—who by this point was in a battle with Pound for control of the movement—alludes to “differences of taste and judgment” and “growing tendencies . . . forcing them [contributors] along different paths.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en388" id="en388r">41</a> And by the 1930 printing of the <i>Imagist Anthology</i>, the note prefacing the edition opens with the premise that imagism was already dead: “To prevent any possible misunderstanding, the announcement is here made that this volume is not intended as an attempt to revive Imagism.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en389" id="en389r">42</a> Instead, the book was meant as a collection of the work of individuals who had formerly written imagist verse but had “developed along varying lines,” though they “still feel friendly.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en390" id="en390r">43</a> Similarly, Ford Maddox Ford begins his foreword to the volume by wistfully reflecting, “those were the days.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en391" id="en391r">44</a></p>

    <p>If writers invested in the movement quickly became dismissive, so too did people on the outside. As Joseph Frank argues, “Imagism was important not so much for any actual poetry written by Imagist poets—no one knew quite what an Imagist poet was—but rather because it opened the way for later developments.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en392" id="en392r">45</a> Within literary history, imagism became a footnote, a set of ideas about images and words that were perceived as less significant than the later work that writers such as Pound and H.D. produced in the genre of the epic long poem, whose temporal expansion was seen as capable of capturing more complexity.</p>

    <p>Just as imagism was considered over almost before it began, so too was H.D. perceived to be gone before her time. H.D. Imagiste’s intimate association with imagism led scholars such as Randall Jarrell to declare in 1945—at which point H.D. was still actively writing and publishing—that “H.D. is History.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en393" id="en393r">46</a> H.D. disappears (excepting references to Pound’s poems to her), for example, from the pages of Hugh Kenner’s influential <i>The Pound Era</i> after the “fall” of imagism. Even among those who respect and study H.D.’s work, the tendency is to read her earlier imagist and later epic poems as representing two utterly distinct branches of thought, the later signaling a complete break from and disavowal of her earlier fascination with the intersection of language and vision.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p133"></a>Although it was Pound’s reading of H.D.’s poem “Hermes of the Ways” that led to the codification of the imagist movement, her ideas about images were never reducible to his, as evidenced by her few published comments on vision. Significantly, though, in critical accounts that have sought to rediscover H.D., her differences from Pound are always coded as a movement away from literal vision; the indeterminacy of her work is interpreted as something that has to be explained away using nonliteral vision (psychoanalytic and prophetic). In <i>H.D. and the Image</i>, for example, Rachel Connor convincingly makes the case that H.D.’s reputation has been diminished by the fact that scholars and readers have been too quick to box her into Pound’s idea of the image and, when that was found to be lacking, to assume she must be as well.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en394" id="en394r">47</a> The way Connor makes her case is by investigating H.D.’s involvement in alternative kinds of vision: psychoanalysis (through her sessions with Freud and her <i>Tribute to Freud</i>, in which she discusses them), psychic (linked to her Moravian heritage, which she discusses in <i>The Gift</i>), and cinematic (particularly through her involvement with the POOL production company and her role as actress in Kenneth Macpherson’s 1930 <i>Borderline</i>).</p>

    <p>While this approach enables us to connect H.D.’s earlier imagist work with her later long poems and epics, a distinct gain, it often does so at the expensive of a complex presentation of the image. In other words, H.D.’s ideas about vision are only permitted to become complex when they move away from the visual and toward more metaphysical ideas about vision (psychic and spiritual). In the few places she publishes explicitly about vision, however, H.D. never separates the two. In <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i>, she describes the connections between “vision of two kinds—vision of the womb and vision of the brain,” the former signifying prophecy and the latter more literal sight.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en395" id="en395r">48</a> Similarly, in a rare review of John Gould Fletcher’s <i>Goblins and Pagodas</i>, H.D. dissociates vision from stability: “[Fletcher] uses the direct image, it is true, but he seems to use it as a means of evoking other and vaguer images.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en396" id="en396r">49</a> Here, H.D. links the direct image, which we might associate with Pound’s vision, to “vaguer” ones that refused to be pinned down. While she expands on the idea of the image, that is, exploring its many meanings, she does not disavow the actual visual image, working instead to expand the possibilities of it. In reading poems from both H.D.’s earliest published volume, <i>Sea Garden</i> (1916), and her 1946 <i>Trilogy</i>, widely regarded as a move away from her imagist roots, I want to use the elements of movement and temporality that are operative in ASL poetry to link the two in an embrace, rather than an abandonment, of the literal visual image.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p134"></a>If Pound’s understanding of the image relies on a certain stillness, H.D’s is full of motion. While H.D. rarely wrote explicitly of her aesthetic principles in the way that Pound did, the opening poem <i>Sea Garden</i> provides her own version of a poetics of the image, one that is specifically associated not with fixity but with dynamic change. The poem reads as follows:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">Rose, harsh rose,</p>

      <p class="sl">marred and with stint of petals,</p>

      <p class="sl">meager flower, thin,</p>

      <p class="sl">sparse of leaf,</p>

      <p class="slf">More precious</p>

      <p class="sl">than a wet rose</p>

      <p class="sl">single on a stem—</p>

      <p class="sl">you are caught in the drift.</p>

      <p class="slf">Stunted, with small leaf,</p>

      <p class="sl">you are flung on the sand,</p>

      <p class="sl">you are lifted</p>

      <p class="sl">in the crisp sand</p>

      <p class="sl">that drives in the wind.</p>

      <p class="slf">Can the spice-rose</p>

      <p class="sl">drip such acrid fragrance</p>

      <p class="sll">hardened in a leaf?<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en397" id="en397r">50</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Here, H.D. provides a rehabilitation of what is perhaps the most clichéd symbol in all of literature, the rose, so often used to represent romantic love, delicacy, and beauty. In “Sea Rose,” however, that general image is replaced with a much more specific one: it is a sea rose that H.D. is interested in, a flower that resists the connotations of the more romanticized image, not gently offered to a lover but “flung on the sand, / you are lifted / in the crisp sand / that drives in the wind,” the verbs actively emphasizing its shifting condition.</p>

    <p>The rose’s beauty, that which makes it “more precious” to the speaker “than a wet rose / single on a stem,” is the fact that it is “caught in the drift”—the elemental forces that tear away at the flower, rendering it “harsh,” “marred,” “stint of petals,” “meager,” “thin,” and “sparse of leaf.” It is this unexpected set of qualities that are identified as desirable. They are indications of strength, the ability to literally weather the storm. This depiction also functions to introduce readers to the poet’s idea of images; the sea rose works for H.D. as a visual because it is not idealized, <a class="page" id="p135"></a>because it is rough around the edges. The frailty of the more realistic rose as opposed to the symbol is emphasized by the whiteness that surrounds the words on the page, like the frothing sea rushing in around the flower.</p>

    <p>In addition to being a poem about nature (and a different kind of natural beauty), and like Stein’s “A Carafe, That Is a Blind Glass,” “Sea Rose” is also a commentary on the ways we usually read images, the kinds of roses that tend to appear in our poetry, and why these easy symbolic associations are problematic. Avoiding the poetic tropes associated with roses, H.D. presents us with a prosaic, imperfect flower, calling our attention to the ways actual flowers interact with their environments, ways that rarely lead to that idealized form. Roses are delicate. The world moves around them, tearing at them. It is that resilience that H.D. celebrates here. She also opens this, her first volume of verse, with a strong message: her images will not be idealized but will be linked to objects in the world, objects that move and are damaged by that movement.</p>

    <p>Throughout the book, H.D. returns to this concept of the image: one marked by imperfections that suggest experience. In what is perhaps H.D.’s most famous imagist poem, “Hermes of the Ways,” the beauty of the image is again presented through its movement, a movement conditioned by interaction with natural elements:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">The hard sand breaks,</p>

      <p class="sl">and the grains of it</p>

      <p class="sl">are clear as wine.</p>

      <p class="slf">Far off over the leagues of it,</p>

      <p class="sl">the wind,</p>

      <p class="sl">playing on the wide shore,</p>

      <p class="sl">piles little ridges,</p>

      <p class="sl">and the great waves</p>

      <p class="sll">break over it.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en398" id="en398r">51</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The sand may be hard and tiny (à la Pound), but it is a hardness in constant motion, caught in a cycle of being blown (one might imagine it slithering) into ridges by the wind, then swept away by the waves breaking over it before being returned to shore with the next swell, only to be swept up by the wind again.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en399" id="en399r">52</a></p>

    <p>Following on this theme, “Sheltered Gardens” offers an explicit critique of images divorced from their surroundings, from their time. “For this beauty,” the beauty of the static image, of the sheltered garden, the speaker notes,</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf"><a class="page" id="p136"></a>beauty without strength,</p>

      <p class="sl">chokes out life.</p>

      <p class="sl">I want wind to break,</p>

      <p class="sl">scatter these pink-stalks,</p>

      <p class="sl">snap off their spiced heads,</p>

      <p class="sl">fling them about with dead leaves—</p>

      <p class="sll">spread the paths with twigs<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en400" id="en400r">53</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The diction is violent, ripping through the delicate images of pink petals like the winds the speaker describes wanting to fling them into. As in the previous two poems, emphasis is placed on activity, suggesting an actual state of affairs in the world—the ravages of time and elemental forces—rather than the stillness of Platonic essences. Nearly each line of the stanza begins with a verb that attempts to keep the flowers in motion, in which state the speaker finds them more agreeable both as things in the world and as poetic images.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en401" id="en401r">54</a></p>

    <p>The most classically imagist of H.D.’s poems, in other words, take great effort to elaborate an image specifically marked by movement, by change occurring over time. This is a version of the image that the poet carried with her throughout her career, across her so-called break with imagism and into her work with longer poetic forms. In “Tribute to the Angels,” the second book of her war epic <i>Trilogy</i>, H.D. demonstrates a continued interest in the problem of stasis, of using language to fix things. Pressed to undertake precisely such a task with regard to an image that the speaker understands as multifaceted, alive, and extended in time, she balks:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">“What is the jewel colour?”</p>

      <p class="sl">green-white, opalescent,</p>

      <p class="slf">with under-layer of changing blue,</p>

      <p class="sl">with rose-vein; a white agate</p>

      <p class="slf">with a pulse uncooled that beats yet,</p>

      <p class="sl">faint blue-violet;</p>

      <p class="slf">it lives, it breathes,</p>

      <p class="sl">it gives off—fragrance?</p>

      <p class="slf">I do not know what it gives,</p>

      <p class="sl">a vibration that we can not name</p>

      <p class="slf">for there is no name for it;</p>

      <p class="sl">my patron said, “name it”;</p>

      <p class="slf"><a class="page" id="p137"></a>I said, I can not name it,</p>

      <p class="sll">there is no name<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en402" id="en402r">55</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The quotation marks around the patron’s demands situate them within a formalized linguistic tradition, as opposed to the speaker’s words, which, even when in direct reply to the interlocutor, are free from standardized punctuation. Even before the speaker of the opening question is identified as being in a position of financial power over the poem’s primary speaker (“patron”), he is already been associated with a system of rules. This link to finance invites a rereading of the implications of his description of the color as a “jewel,” tying the aesthetic observation to objects with monetary value.</p>

    <p>Significantly, once identified in line 12 as the patron, the character immediately shifts from the interrogative to the imperative mode. Calling the words that the primary speaker has just finished using to communicate about the color into question, he demands that she ascribe to it a singular name. The primary speaker’s description actively avoids this move to stabilize, referencing both colors that refuse to be pinned down (“green-white,” “opalescent,” “under-layer of changing blue,” “blue-violet”) and descriptors that ascribe movement (“changing,” “vibration”) and life (“rose-vein,” “pulse uncooled that beats yet,” “it lives, it breaths”). Against the impulse to stabilize and commodify, the primary speaker insists that visual impressions are multivalent and changing.</p>

    <p>This presentation of the visual image deliberately points to a failure of conventional language to capture what the speaker finds significant about it. And this becomes a central thematic strand of the poem. When the Lady, who becomes Mary through the alchemic transmutation of language—“Now polish the crucible / and set the jet of flame // under, til <i>marah-mar</i> / are melted, fuse and join // and change and alter, / mer, mere, mère, mater, Maia, Mary, // Star of the Sea, Mother”—arrives, apparently to provide “Holy Wisdom” that will “retrieve / what she lost the race, // given over to sin, to death,” the “Book of Life” she carries is specifically “not / the tome of the ancient wisdom” but rather “the blank pages / of the unwritten volume of the new.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en403" id="en403r">56</a></p>

    <p>Significantly, this wisdom, like the image of Valli’s spiderweb, cannot be captured in the pages of a book and is linked to vision. “This is no rune nor riddle,” the poem’s speaker cryptically explains; “it is happening everywhere . . . but you have seen for yourself . . . you have seen for yourself.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en404" id="en404r">57</a> She insists that the truth is engaged experientially, visually, and that in the same way that the color that fascinates the speaker <a class="page" id="p138"></a>cannot be named and the pages of the book cannot be filled, it cannot be explained. The blank pages of the book also, and unexpectedly, link H.D.’s understanding of vision to silence, to something that escapes fixed knowledge. The refrain of “we have seen” is picked up in the twenty-ninth section of the poem, in which the various incarnations of the Lady are presented:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">we have seen her, an empress,</p>

      <p class="sl">magnificent in pomp and grace,</p>

      <p class="slf">and we have seen her</p>

      <p class="sl">with a single flower</p>

      <p class="slf">or a cluster of garden-pinks</p>

      <p class="sl">in a glass beside her;</p>

      <p class="slf">we have seen her snood</p>

      <p class="sl">drawn over her hair,</p>

      <p class="slf">or her face set in profile</p>

      <p class="sll">with the blue hood and stars;<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en405" id="en405r">58</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The catalogue continues for eighteen more couplets (and two sections) before the speaker reveals, “none of these, none of these / suggest her as I saw her.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en406" id="en406r">59</a> The description of the Lady, that is, does not provide the kind of seeing or understanding that the speaker is after. She comes closest when she compares what she has witnessed to movement: the “gracious friendliness / of the marble sea-maids in Venice, // who climb the altar-stair”—in other words, when she moves away from more traditional, static visual description.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en407" id="en407r">60</a></p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0504">The Past in the Present</h2>

    <div class="epigraph">
      <p class="ep"><i>Enter H.D., wrapped in a palimpsest</i>—Harry Crosby, “Aeronautics”</p>
    </div>

    <p class="paft">The presentation of the visual image as indeterminate and in motion resonates with H.D.’s primary literary trope for discussing the temporal expansiveness of her later work: the palimpsest. H.D.’s interest in the figure has frequently been analyzed in relation to her spiritualism, read as a metaphor for her belief in a metaphysical relationship between past and present, but rarely in terms of actual sight. What is most striking about the palimpsest is that the temporal leaps it allows are decidedly <i>not</i> metaphysical; they are physically, visually present. If H.D.’s first volume <a class="page" id="p139"></a>of poetry, the one most associated with imagism, begins with a poetics—indeed, an ethics—of the image as moving, so too does her work engage the other unexpected aspect of visual language: time. As we saw, one of the interesting elements that ASL as visual language adds to the discussion is an expansion of time, a quality usually ascribed to the long poem. Even in work that has been described as falling neatly in this period of H.D.’s career, however, she ties this expansion to literal visual images.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en408" id="en408r">61</a></p>

    <p>H.D. begins her 1926 novel <i>Palimpsest</i> with a definition suggesting her understanding of the concept:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">a palimpsest, i.e., a</p>

      <p class="sl">parchment from which one writing has been</p>

      <p class="sll">erased to make room for another.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en409" id="en409r">62</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Palimpsests provide visible trace of the past in the present, appearing on parchment or paper that has been written on several times, earlier versions having been imperfectly erased. Past marks leave visible traces that poke through the most recent writing, shading its meaning with their presence, in addition to any semantic significance it might be possible to make out. Palimpsests enable, to return to Eliot, a literal presentness of the past, an extension of it into the present. Significantly for our purposes, H.D. connects such presence to her experimentation with the intersection between visual images and words.</p>

    <p><i>Trilogy</i> is driven by a sense of the palimpsestic, of the past becoming visible when one scrapes away at the text. “How can you scratch out // indelible ink of the palimpsest / of past misadventure?” the speaker asks, suggesting visual figure as a means of engagement in, rather than escape from, the present.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en410" id="en410r">63</a> <i>Trilogy</i> opens with a nontextual palimpsest drawn from the poet’s own experience of living in London during the bombings of the Second World War. Contemplating the ruins of a hollowed-out structure, where layers of the past have been made literally visible, the speaker describes,</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">An incident here and there,</p>

      <p class="sl">And rails gone (for guns)</p>

      <p class="sl">From your (and my) old town square:</p>

      <p class="slf">. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .</p>

      <p class="slf">there, as here, ruin opens</p>

      <p class="sl">the tomb, the temple; enter,</p>

      <p class="sll">there as here, there are no doors:</p>

      <p class="slf"><a class="page" id="p140"></a>the shrine lies open to the sky,</p>

      <p class="sl">the rain falls, here, there</p>

      <p class="sl">sand drifts; eternity endures:</p>

      <p class="slf">ruin everywhere, yet as the fallen roof</p>

      <p class="sl">leaves the sealed room</p>

      <p class="sl">open to the air,</p>

      <p class="slf">so, through our desolation,</p>

      <p class="sl">thoughts stir, inspiration stalks us</p>

      <p class="sll">through gloom<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en411" id="en411r">64</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Deploying “ruin” as a verb, rather than a noun, emphasizes the activity (and culpability) inherent in the image of buildings whose roofs have been blasted away, leaving them open to the sky. This active process of ruin is everywhere part of eternity, disallowing stasis. It is this reality that people become aware of when encountering the bombed-out buildings, their minds stirred into motion just as elemental forces (shifting sand, falling rain) alter those no-longer-sealed rooms.</p>

    <p>Whatever metaphorical associations the speaker draws from this visual image, the political force of the poem remains linked to its status as a literal image. Bits of older buildings are actually made visible by the violent removal of that which had covered them. Setting contemporary violence in the context of earlier cycles of destruction is H.D.’s most directly political use of the palimpsest. Significantly, and in defiance of critiques that suggested the visual image was too bounded to perform effective socially aware work, neither this political engagement nor the temporal expansiveness she invokes to make her point draws her away from optical vision.</p>

    <p>In a letter to Norman Holmes Pearson, H.D. recounts an actual encounter with the destroyed home of a neighbor that may have provided the inspiration for this particular image: “The house next door was struck another night. We came home and simply waded through glass. . . . One of the group found some pleasure in the sight of the tilted shelves and the books tumbled on the floor. He gave a decisive football kick with his army boot to the fattest volume. It happened actually to be Browning. He demanded dramatically, ‘what is the use of all this now?’”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en412" id="en412r">65</a> In some ways, the entirety of <i>Trilogy</i> can be interpreted as a response to this question: What is the use of language in the face of the real-world palimpsests violently produced in the context of war? As I suggested in my discussion of movement, one answer that H.D. provides <a class="page" id="p141"></a>in the poem is the refusal of stasis, the embrace of an indeterminacy that enables a certain amount of personal control in how one interprets events or images and the disavowal of a politics that would seek to use the idea of definitive truth to impose its will on others. “Ruin opens / the tomb” suggests both activity and, homonymically, language—the sound of “rune” resonating through “ruin,” connecting movement and language to this particular visual image.</p>

    <p>Another way H.D. develops this notion of playful and liberating indeterminacy is through the palimpsestic nature of words themselves. Analogous to Crane’s linguistic density, as the poem’s speaker explains later in the first book, individual words function as poems in and of themselves, “anagrams, cryptograms, / little boxes, conditioned // to hatch butterflies.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en413" id="en413r">66</a> Words as butterflies again ties language to motion, as well indeterminacy. H.D. actively “melt[s], fuse[s] and join[s]” the bitter “<i>marah-mar</i>” into “mer, mere, mère, mater, Maia, Mary.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en414" id="en414r">67</a> Similarly, she moves from “venery” to “Venus whose name is kin // to venerate, / venerator” and the inaccurate identification of “word” as the root of “sword.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en415" id="en415r">68</a> These traces are actually (or at least they actually appear to be) present in the words themselves, histories of their roots and etymologies visible in the letters on the page. At the heart of indeterminacy and slippage, that is, H.D. again brings us back to a concrete, visual image. As in her earlier work, these superficially opposing ideas about what the image can mean are presented as intrinsically interconnected.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0505">Palimpsestic Fiction</h2>

    <p class="paft">In addition to enhancing our reading of works that have long been associated with the visual image, the suggestion of the relationship between movement, temporality, and the image in the context of language helps us to uncover visual structures of works not typically associated with vision at all, including those of William Faulkner. It has become a critical commonplace when describing the work of Faulkner to focus on his lyrical or musical use of language, his attention to elements of aurality and orality in language.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en416" id="en416r">69</a> As William E.&nbsp;H. Meyer Jr. summarizes the near consensus, “Faulkner’s Southern lyricism and historicism continue to promote aurality over hard-nosed vision in novels including <i>The Sound and the Fury</i> and <i>Light in August</i>.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en417" id="en417r">70</a> As I have demonstrated through the history of imagism, there is a pervasive attempt in modernist studies to separate off modes of writing specifically perceived as visual from other (usually—though strikingly not in Meyer’s <a class="page" id="p142"></a>article—more critically valued) approaches to modernist aesthetics. The assumption behind such divisions is that the visual image is something concrete and specific (“hard-nosed”), that it is inextricably bound to a particular moment and place. Both modernist epic and aurally focused work, by contrast, tend to be associated with expansiveness through time and space. These biased assumptions about the possibilities of visual language have limited perception of explicitly visual poetics. They have also occluded the significance of the visual within texts such as <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en418" id="en418r">71</a></p>

    <p><i>The Sound and the Fury</i> is famous for being a difficult text, a difficulty that derives in large part from its structure: the novel is presented from a variety of perspectives—those of Benjy, Quentin, Jason, and a third-person narrator who focuses primarily on events concerning Dilsey. Unlike the simultaneity of perspectives of a cubist painting or a Stein poem, these perspectival shifts in Faulkner are associated with the epic sweep of his narrative and are therefore read as unrelated to imagism.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en419" id="en419r">72</a> As I have argued in both this chapter and chapter 3, however, both imagism in particular and an understanding of visual language more generally can and do incorporate temporality in ways that resonate with <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>.</p>

    <p>This is most apparent in the novel’s first section, “April Seventh, 1928,” which is told from the perspective of the Compsons’ thirty-three-year-old intellectually disabled son, Benjy. It is within Benjy’s section that Faulkner is most formally experimental, especially in the ways he represents time. The section contains multiple scenes occurring over several decades, which the novel moves between with no warning apart from an inconsistent use of italics. This juxtaposition has made the first section the most challenging part of the text for most readers to follow. Indeed, Faulkner’s original plan was to color code each of the fourteen separate scenes he identified.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en420" id="en420r">73</a> In 1929, when the novel was initially published, such a color scheme was expensive and impractical, and the text instead registered some of these jumps in italics, although, as George R. Stewart points out, the typographical shifts do not necessarily indicate a separate scene, often leading to more confusion than they resolve.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en421" id="en421r">74</a></p>

    <p>The difficulties of the text’s first section, in other words, arise in part from Faulkner’s engagement with the modernist techniques of fragmentation and juxtaposition that we encountered in chapter 3 and in part because of pragmatic limitations of printing. Despite having multiple extratextual explanations, however, they have most <a class="page" id="p143"></a>commonly been attributed to Benjy’s disability. The connection was made first and most famously by Faulkner himself. In an interview with Jean Stein vanden Heuve, Faulkner dismissively suggests, “You can’t feel anything for Benjy because he doesn’t feel anything. . . . He was an animal.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en422" id="en422r">75</a> Similarly, despite admitting to conceiving the entire novel based around Benjy’s section, Faulkner describes its nonlinear structure to a group of undergraduates in 1957 as “part of the failure”: “It seemed to me that the book approached nearer the dream if the groundwork of it was laid by the idiot, who was incapable of relevancy.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en423" id="en423r">76</a></p>

    <p>Alongside the novel’s title, taken from Macbeth’s final soliloquy, in which the character describes life as “a tale / Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury / Signifying nothing,” these comments have been taken to mean that Benjy’s status as an intellectually disabled individual, marked in particular by his repeated bellowing, renders him incapable of producing meaning.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en424" id="en424r">77</a> Beyond the fact that Macbeth, particularly at this point in the play, is an odd authority to turn to for rational wisdom and that, in any case, the “tale / told by an idiot, full of sound and fury” refers to life, that is, something of immense complexity, the character has been more often interpreted, as Stacy Burton notes, “as a passive, blank slate upon which events are written.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en425" id="en425r">78</a> Trapped by biases regarding intellectual disability that restrict readings of disabled characters such as Benjy to particular (and predictable) tropes—markers of displeased deities, punishments for familial sin, evildoers whose disability becomes an apparently legible index of their own malfeasance—Benjy and his narrative voice are interpreted as convenient symbols for the “corrupted” blood of his once-prosperous family, the corporeal evidence of their descent.</p>

    <p>Using disabled characters as narrative prostheses, to return to Sharon Snyder and David Mitchell’s argument, is always problematic, but it is particularly counterproductive here as it disallows a recognition of the solutions that Benjy’s voice offers to some of the novel’s (and the Compsons’) central problems: the passing away of the old South and the related fall of the family’s fortunes. As more careful readers have noted, it is factually inaccurate to suggest that Benjy’s section lacks an internal coherence. Even if the writer does not provide typographical (or colored) hints to the reader, the supposedly irrelevant Benjy repeatedly demonstrates a photographic recollection of precise experiences and exchanges of dialogue that are linked through clear logical patterns, as in the following series of scenes from the very beginning of the novel:</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqf"><a class="page" id="p144"></a>“Wait a minute.” Luster said. “You snagged on that nail again. Cant you never crawl through here without snagging on that nail.”</p>

      <p class="bq"><i>Caddy uncaught me and we crawled through. Uncle Maury said to not let anybody see us, so we better stoop over, Caddy said. Stoop over, Benjy. Like this, see. We stooped over and crossed the garden, where the flowers rasped and rattled against us. The ground was hard. We climbed the fence, where the pigs were grunting and snuffing. I expect they’re sorry because one of them got killed today, Caddy said. The ground was hard, churned and knotted.</i></p>

      <p class="bq"><i>Keep your hands in your pockets, Caddy said. Or they’ll get froze. You don’t want your hands froze on Christmas, do you</i>.</p>

      <p class="bql">“It’s too cold out there.” Versh said. “You don’t want to go out doors.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en426" id="en426r">79</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">These synchronic scenes are linked to specific sensory experiences, which allow readers who are looking to identify the moment the scene shifts: Benjy’s feeling of catching his clothing on a nail while trying to climb under the fence, the cold of the winter days. Also significant is the clarity of these memories of events, which, we piece together later, occur decades apart. Benjy is able to report the specific sounds of the pigs, the movements of the flowers, the texture of the ground, the sound of Luster’s and Caddie’s dialects. Rather than making the character appear to have no mind, or a mind that is unknowable, presenting Benjy’s impressions in this manner functions to align him with other, non-intellectually-disabled characters whose thoughts are narrated through the style of stream of consciousness. In this way, and against Faulkner’s intentions, Benjy’s portrayal can be read in conversation with Sherwood Anderson’s and Charlie Chaplin’s depictions of the dangers of communicative norms; readers see that Benjy has complex and meaningful thought processes. He is unable to express them in conventional speech, however, and it is this that leads to his castration and institutionalization.</p>

    <p>The sensory links that provide this logical lattice also function to establish a relationship between past and present that is productively distinct from those experienced by the other characters. While Benjy tends to be read as having no conception of time, his family is seen to be overburdened by it. For Quentin and Jason, the other Compsons granted their own sections of the text, the past functions as something that one is either trapped in or haunted by. In an analysis of Faulkner’s novel, Jean-Paul Sartre argues that “time is, above all, <i>that which separates</i>.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en427" id="en427r">80</a> It is what fragments the novel into these difficult slivers, what <a class="page" id="p145"></a>makes it impossible for the characters to connect with one another at the moments they most need support, what estranges the Compsons from the more illustrious history of their family.</p>

    <p>Sartre describes such temporal collapse as a process by which “the hero’s consciousness ‘sinks back into the past’ and rises only to sink back again. The present is not, it becomes. Everything <i>was</i>.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en428" id="en428r">81</a> In this reading, the blurred chronology becomes a problem, not merely for readers struggling through the text but for the characters who are prohibited from moving forward by an intense connection to what came before that shatters the present, bleeding it of its potential, disallowing its wholeness. The reflection of this temporal instability onto form is perceived as a haunting from which no one is permitted to escape.</p>

    <p>But as I have argued, this account does not accurately reflect Benjy’s experience of time, in which events across years are knitted together. As the passage quoted earlier demonstrates, time as experienced by Benjy is decidedly <i>not</i> separation. The collapse of past into present enables him to experience Caddy, to inhabit a time when she and he were taking a wintry walk, rather than being confined to a present when she has always already gone. Reversing Sartre’s suggestion that “everything has already happened” in the novel, such a model suggests that perhaps everything is happening now.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en429" id="en429r">82</a> Readers experience this continuous present tense; the lack of paragraph differentiation between time periods collapses all of time in an undifferentiated palimpsest on the page. Benjy’s responses to these events suggest that he similarly does not distinguish between them. Coming out of a section in which he was sent to deliver a letter to Mrs. Patterson from his uncle Maury (with whom Mrs. Patterson was having an affair), for example, Benjy panics when he is intercepted by Mr. Patterson and runs down the hill. The description of this event and what happens next reads as follows: “<i>He took the letter. Mrs Patterson’s dress was caught on the fence. I saw her eyes again and I ran down the hill.</i> ‘They aint nothing over yonder but houses. . . . We going down to the branch.’”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en430" id="en430r">83</a> As Luster’s dialogue after the italics reveals, in the text’s present Benjy is still running from the couple, despite the fact that the action in this context lacks the logic it had in the earlier scene. For Benjy, the scene jumps function not as recollections of time gone by but as an enactment of Stein’s continuous present.</p>

    <p>As these brief examples demonstrate, in Benjy’s section we are presented with an alternative, nonlinear model of temporality, one that resonates strongly with the ways H.D.’s palimpsest imagines nonlinear processing as a movement away from totalizing models of fixed <a class="page" id="p146"></a>knowledge. It is precisely such an alternative way of interacting with their cultural and familial past that the Compsons desperately need. Read in this way, Benjy opens the novel not as metaphor of the family’s fallen status but as a structural alternative to the tragic logic that insists on a particular, teleological descent into destruction. Because of their own biases, however, both the characters and Faulkner fail to pick up on it. And it is this failure to recognize the alternative to their own temporality offered by Benjy’s worldview, rather than the “degraded” genes that his difference is interpreted as representing, that makes the family’s tragedy inevitable.</p>

    <p>While <i>The Sound and the Fury</i> is not an obviously visual novel in that it is not characterized by lengthy descriptions of what things look like, its similarities to the work of H.D. suggest that it might be read as structurally visual in its approach to temporality, as well as in the ways it engages with elements of nonlinearity and indeterminacy that the ASL poetry of Bernard Bragg and Clayton Valli demonstrates are fundamental components of visual language. In addition to expanding the contexts in which we might think about Deaf culture and language to include works such as <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>, <i>Trilogy</i>, or H.D.’s imagist poetry, that is, Deaf epistemology reveals the connections between modernists’ interest in visual thinking (the image) and temporality (epic expansion, often expressed through techniques such as stream of consciousness), which have nearly always been approached as entirely separate projects. As I hope to have demonstrated in this chapter, as well as those that precede it, complicating the idea of this difference as a tension has wide-reaching implications for both our understanding of specific texts or authors and our approach to modernist aesthetics more broadly.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
