<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="acknow">
    <h1 class="ctfm"><a class="page" id="pvii"></a><a class="page" id="pvi"></a><a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">Acknowledgments</a></h1>

    <p class="pf">I have had the immense good fortune to be surrounded throughout my academic career by mentors who are just as generous and kind as they are brilliant. I am thankful to everyone who worked, taught, or studied at the sorely missed Barat College of DePaul University for creating such a magical environment, especially Missy Bradshaw, who introduced me to modernism and showed me that I could do this with my life. At the University at Buffalo, Randy Schiff, Michael Sayeau, and Damien Keane provided incredibly helpful advice and feedback on my work. I am grateful to Ramón Soto-Crespo for pushing me to find the thesis and to Tim Dean for your invaluable guidance at every stage of this project. For so many reasons, this book would not exist without the two of you and all of your support.</p>

    <p>My colleagues at Fordham University have created a warm academic home for which I am deeply grateful. I am also appreciative and humbled by the amazing community of disability scholars, activists, and students it has been my privilege to interact with at conferences, in classrooms, in print, and online.</p>

    <p>Thank you to those who read the manuscript in its latter stages and helped me to shape it, especially Stephanie Kerschbaum and my reviewers, Rachel Adams and Brenda Jo Brueggemann; and to everyone at New York University Press, especially Eric Zinner and Alicia Nadkarni, who helped guide me through this process.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="pviii"></a>It has taken a lot to get this book written, and throughout I have been sustained by the most amazing friendships. Thank you to Nicole Coover-Thompson for being there, always, for all these years; and to Sonya Brockman and Lorna Pérez, for Bollywood dance parties, Sunday hiking expeditions, and your willingness to cross international borders, even when only to acquire bubble bath. Having such brilliant women as interlocutors has enhanced my work, and having you all as friends has immeasurably enriched my life.</p>

    <p>And finally, thank you to my mother, Linda, for teaching me to read and making everything possible. This is for you.</p>

    <p class="psec">* * *</p>

    <p class="psec">A portion of chapter 2 appeared as “Shattering Communicative Norms: The Politics of Embodied Language in <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>” in <i>Modern Language Studies</i> 43.2 (2014): 25–39. Reprinted with permission.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
