<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="ch03">
    <h1 class="cn"><a class="page" id="p62"></a><a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">2. Primitivism: Communicative Norms and the Ethics of the Story</a></h1>

    <div class="epigraph">
      <p class="ep">Such a body might be out of step with the modern, technologically advanced world: diagnoses like hysteria, neurasthenia, even constipation and eye strain, registered the stress placed on the body by civilization, and suggested that compensatory action was necessary. Even those who wished to offer the body as the site of authenticity were forced to posit a return to an atavistic substratum which created a temporal discontinuity in their idealizations, a fantasy of primitivism.</p>

      <p class="ept">—<span style="font-style: normal;">Tim Armstrong,</span> <i>Modernism, Technology and the Body</i></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pf">In <i>Modernism, Technology and the Body</i>, Tim Armstrong argues that modernity placed complex demands on individuals by requiring them to navigate a range of new environments and ideas, the pressures of which were frequently registered in physical and psychological ailments—neurasthenia, hysteria, eye strain. In this context, fantasies of a premodern, primitivist world in which neither these new stressors nor their bodily implications needed to be addressed operated as welcome escapes from the technologically driven present. The psychological explanation that Armstrong suggests attempts to reconcile one of the persistent tensions running through aesthetic modernism: a pervasive interest in all things new—the mechanized, technologized, automatized steel and speed of, on the industrial front, Henry Ford and, on the aesthetic, movements such as futurism and vorticism—and the growing obsession with forms of art and consumer goods associated with the past; the primitivist turn first in the visual arts and then in dance and literature. As in my analysis of the gap between celebrity culture and impersonal aesthetics in chapter 1, I want to return to this tension from the perspective of Deaf epistemology in order to unpack the ways we might understand these competing narratives as more than simply contradictory.</p>

    <p>For a long time, as the scholar Sieglinde Lemke explains, “modernist aesthetics and the assembly line were conflated in the popular imagination.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en183" id="en183r">1</a> The speed and steel of modern life were understood to have direct impact on declarations of aesthetic principles such as those we find in the futurist manifesto, which famously “affirm[ed] that the world’s <a class="page" id="p63"></a>magnificence has been enriched by a new beauty: the beauty of speed. A racing car whose hood is adorned with great pipes explosive breath—a roaring car that seems to ride on grapeshot is more beautiful than the <i>Victory of Samothrace</i>.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en184" id="en184r">2</a> Despite the weight this version of modernism has held in our narratives of the period, however, the drive to innovate through an embrace of the technological and a rejection of a particular idea of the past describes only one version of modernist aesthetics.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en185" id="en185r">3</a> Its notion of temporality in particular always sat uncomfortably with the simultaneous fascination that modernist writers and artists had with a variety of imagined others who were made to represent an aesthetic that explicitly challenged that model.</p>

    <p>Perhaps no one better exemplifies this multidirectional thrust than Josephine Baker. Born in St. Louis in 1906, Baker traveled to Paris in 1925 as part of <i>La Revue Nègre</i>, an all-black musical show organized by Caroline Dudley Reagan. The show’s finale was the now infamous <i>dans sauvage</i>, set against a backdrop of a jungle intended to evoke an Africa to which Baker herself had never been. According to Phyllis Rose, Baker “play[ed] up the image of herself as a natural,” performing in what seemed to be only feathers and jewelry and dancing alongside her partner, Joe Alex, in a manner apparently spontaneous and animalistic, allowing the audience to interpolate her as the ultimate other.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en186" id="en186r">4</a></p>

    <p>Baker’s performance as Fatou in <i>La Folie du Jour</i> at the Folies-Bergère in 1926 continued this conflation of primitivist fantasies. Baker appeared in a g-string adorned with silk bananas. As Carole Sweeney has noted, in these performances Baker embodies the dialectical pull of modernism toward both past and future: “Baker was equally held to be a personification of the modern spirit that turned its gaze to the future as much as to the past. She was the figure who symbolized excesses of both the already imagined primitive past and the yet to be imagined modern future: the living symbol of a modern primitivist aesthetic.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en187" id="en187r">5</a> The angles of her body visually echoing those of a cubist painting, her body contorting and gyrating to modern music, all while enabling audiences to project onto her ideas about the past as an escape from modern social and bodily norms, Baker appeared to present the best of all worlds. The supposedly non-Western Other was constructed as being separated not only by space but by time, a remnant of what for modern audiences appeared both a simpler and more desirable epoch. The appeal of this distancing drove interest in primitivism across art forms. As Robert Goldwater explained in his landmark 1967 <i>Primitivism in Modern Art</i>, “The champions of primitive art saw in it unique characteristics which could be opposed <a class="page" id="p64"></a>with advantage to any subsequent evolution of style. It was an ideal from which most other art was a falling-away, and to which all other art was to be compared. They did not defend, they eulogized.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en188" id="en188r">6</a> By evoking an Africa meant to signify as both geographically and temporally distant, Baker positioned herself as a living embodiment of a fetishized vision of the past.</p>

    <p>Much of this fantasy was specifically linked to corporeality; commentary on Baker frequently described her body as signifying in ways that went beyond the limitations of specific linguistic messages. Indeed, for the interpolation process to function successfully, she could not be seen to fully answer back in language even when she was speaking onstage. Despite singing as well as dancing in the shows, it was nonverbal communication that most intrigued both audiences and critics. As Sweeney summarizes,</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">The primitive subject is transparent and readable to its audience, who might know the truth of the black subject without the need for articulation at any linguistic level, . . . the words unimportant in themselves as they are a sensual, aural antidote to moribund intellectualism. . . . It is the sensation, the almost physicality of the words, rather than any inherent meaning, that offers her audience suggestions of a dream island-scape, articulating the secret desires of the modern subject and allowing the listener access to the uncorrupted prelapsarian paradise of the primitive subject.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en189" id="en189r">7</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The appeal of an “uncorrupted prelapsarian paradise” is formulated as a mute sensuality through which modern voyeurs can engage in “secret desires” but to which they are not responsible, an evocation of a mythical past to which they need not answer. The movement to displace the geographic onto the temporal is at least in part an attempt to render it less threatening; if it belongs to the past, it does not constitute a danger in or to the present. Primitivist spectacle created spaces where people could appear to be rebelling against contemporary mores without actually challenging the systems of power embedded in them. The semantic content of the language Baker used in performance was superseded by the other forms of communication of her body.</p>

    <p>In both these performances, and the critical reaction to them, we can trace a conflation of what are two significant and linked, though rarely discussed as such, aspects of modernist primitivism: the mapping of space (geographically distanced “others”) onto time (the popular belief that such “others” belonged to earlier stages of history) and the <a class="page" id="p65"></a>association of embodied communication with this earlier, mythical stage of development. In both these ideas, primitivism becomes the dialectical opposite of modernity. As Elazar Barkan and Ronald Bush explain in their introduction to <i>Prehistories of the Future</i>, however, the inclusion of geographically othered peoples and cultures into the category of the primitive was a specifically modern development: “Previously, when art historians spoke of the ‘primitive,’ they usually had in mind the ‘naïve’ style of Pre-Raphaelite and Colonial American painting—that is, artifacts of the West’s own childhood. In the late nineteenth century, however, primitive painting came increasingly to connote the geographically exotic ‘savage’—the violence and energy of the barbaric—even as violence was beginning to receive its ‘positive’ modern spin.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en190" id="en190r">8</a> Primitivism, that is, takes a geographic or racial distinction (the cultures of non-Western countries or of people of color within Western countries) and turns it into a temporal one (something from the past, a simplicity to which, given the craze of modernity, it might be desirable to return).</p>

    <p>It should perhaps come as no surprise that turn-of-the-century writers and thinkers were confusing time and space. As Stephen Kern persuasively argues in <i>The Culture of Time and Space, 1880–1918</i>, this kind of overlay developed out of contemporary ideas in physics. One of the consequences of Albert Einstein’s 1905 theory of special relativity, which suggested the relativistic nature of both space and time as a result of time dilation—the slowing of time based on frames of reference—was the realization that time and space were not separate entities. As Hermann Minkowski, who first explicitly explored the ramifications of this in a 1908 essay, proclaimed, “henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en191" id="en191r">9</a></p>

    <p>Numerous art forms experimented with the implications of this conflation from an experiential perspective. As had been the case with the borrowing of Darwinist evolutionary science into the realm of the social, anthropological, and artistic, however, many of those imagined implications were decidedly racist, enabling those who were predisposed to do so to label non-Western cultures and peoples (or people of color generally) as primitive. The hugely successful 1933 film <i>King Kong</i> famously dramatized this logic by representing the exotically othered inhabitants of Skull Island as displaced not only in space but in time, sharing their island with dinosaurs and other Jurassic creatures.</p>

    <p>Expanding the modernist canon to more appropriately take account of this problematic move requires a consideration of the ways space and <a class="page" id="p66"></a>time are yoked together. The geographic expansion of the New Modernist Studies—evidenced by such important anthologies as Douglas Mao and Rebecca L. Walkowitz’s <i>Bad Modernisms</i> (2006) and Laura Doyle and Laura Winkiel’s <i>Geomodernisms: Race, Modernism, Modernity</i> (2005)—powerfully argues for the inclusion of non–Anglo American or western European modernisms in the cannon. And Susan Stanford Friedman’s “Periodizing Modernism: Postcolonial Modernities and the Space/Time Borders of Modernist Studies” convincingly suggests that this project of inclusion impacts our understanding of the temporal boundaries surrounding “modernism” as well, requiring an acknowledgment of the different historical moments in which cultures encountered and reacted artistically to modernity.</p>

    <p>Deaf studies contributes to this discourse by making visible the extent to which much of what drove the interest in primitivism—particularly the nonverbal communication—was very much a part of cultures that existed in modernity’s present tense. Largely missing from the discussion of the role that ideas about primitive embodiment played in early twentieth-century fascination with so-called primitive art forms has been analysis of the relationship between embodiment and language. Conversely, the explosion of interest in modernity’s language politics—demonstrated by recent studies in multilingual modernisms, including Joshua Miller’s <i>Accented America</i> (2011) and Sarah Wilson’s <i>Melting-Pot Modernism</i> (2010)—have not addressed the interrelation of bodies, disability, and language practices. Through an exploration of the assumptions about language and bodies that came together in the regulatory practices surrounding deaf bodies in the early twentieth century—a set of practices I term <i>communicative norms</i>—this chapter explores how perceptions of language played into modernist primitivism and how adding language to our discussion of the ways modern bodies explored alternatives to this regulation enhances our understanding of them.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0301">Regulating Bodies</h2>

    <p class="paft">The standard reading of modernist primitivism, as Armstrong outlines, is that it constitutes a kind of release valve for the period’s ever-increasing regulatory pressures. The hyperrepresentation of the bodies of othered individuals, particularly in the arts, was interpreted as one such escape from the systematic repression of embodiment in most other areas of life. Reflecting on the early twentieth century, Theodor Adorno observed that “anything that is not reified, cannot be counted <a class="page" id="p67"></a>and measured, ceases to exist.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en192" id="en192r">10</a> In many ways, this process of classifying and evaluating became the guiding philosophy of the age. The rise of industrialism and statistics provided people in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with new ways of measuring and regulating not only products but practices and bodies, a process that the history of sign language use in the United States can helpfully illuminate. Tellingly, the word to describe these standards, “norm”—indicating “a standard or pattern of behavior that is accepted in or of a group”—is dated by the <i>Oxford English Dictionary</i> to 1900.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en193" id="en193r">11</a> Whereas earlier cultural moments had discussed ideal practices and bodies as unachievable goals, the new notion of the norm was meant for more pragmatic applications.</p>

    <p>Bodies that did not conform were subject to new regulatory intensity, a process that had dramatic consequences for individuals who were now seen as not just different but disabled. People who in previous generations would have largely lived anonymously within their communities found themselves being probed, diagnosed, and institutionalized. As Lennard J. Davis puts it, “when we think of bodies, in a society where the concept of the norm is operative, then people with disabilities are thought of as deviants.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en194" id="en194r">12</a> In what had rapidly become a fiercely normalizing society, such deviance was viewed as not only undesirable but threatening to what was perceived as a brave new world in which science could improve humanity.</p>

    <p>Given the pervasiveness of this mind-set, it is unsurprising that the drive to standardize also spilled over into the realm of the linguistic. In the United States, a country that lacked the equivalent of a regulatory body like the French Academy, concerns arose that American English had become too inclusive and was lacking in precision. Questions of language became intimately bound with those of national identity, an issue that was particularly fraught during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as a result of the aftershocks of the U.S. Civil War as well as massive waves of immigration. As I discussed in the introduction, one’s abilities in English came to be viewed as a means of drawing a clearer line around who counted as American.</p>

    <p>This logic, intended to exclude from the American body politic anyone who did not speak standard American English, proved deeply offensive and injurious to members of communities for which English was not the sole or primary mode of communication.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en195" id="en195r">13</a> In addition to indigenous Americans and immigrants, this also included the deaf.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en196" id="en196r">14</a> Explaining deaf education in a 1913 letter, Alexander Graham Bell summarized a widely held belief that “in an English speaking country like the United <a class="page" id="p68"></a>States, the English language, <i>and the English language alone</i>, should be used as the means of communication and instruction.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en197" id="en197r">15</a> The idea was that to be an American, one had to speak “like an American,” in an increasingly standardized American English.</p>

    <p>As regulation of both language use and bodies intensified, a new kind of norm developed in the space where the two intersected, which I refer to as a <i>communicative norm</i>. This set of norms regulated not only the kinds of language people used but also the ways their bodies looked, moved through space, and interacted with other subjects while engaging in linguistic activities. In the century that has passed between that time and our own, scholars have become adept at analyzing texts and situations for their relationships to norms connected with gender roles, race and ethnicity, class, sexuality, and, increasingly, ability. But despite the prevalence of communicative norms, the regulation of this aspect of our lives remains underanalyzed.</p>

    <p>The oversight is significant because it speaks to our tendency to, as David Appelbaum puts it, “devitalize[] voice,” as well as language more broadly.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en198" id="en198r">16</a> Identifying and thinking through communicative norms forces us to confront the physicality of our linguistic practices, something with which centuries of Cartesian dualism in general, as well as a particular distaste for bodies in some branches of modernist writing and criticism, has left us uncomfortable. It also reminds us of the ways that commentary on performances such as Baker’s very specifically sets them outside contemporary discussions about language in more explicitly political spheres. To celebrate the nonverbal communication of Baker’s body over her more standardized verbal speech is to fly directly in the fact of prevalent attitudes toward and policies surrounding language use at the time.</p>

    <p>The mapping of concerns about embodiment (as well as racist and nationalist attitudes) onto particular linguistic communities is not, as I demonstrated in the introduction, restricted to those that employ manual languages. But sign languages, precisely because of their inescapable physicality, provide a uniquely rich site from which to analyze the intersection of cultural tensions over linguistic and embodied norms. Like other kinds of nonverbal bodily communication, manual languages serve as a litmus test, revealing attitudes toward nonnormative bodies and identities. As Lennard Davis argues, “when sign language is repressed as a signifying practice, what is repressed is a connection with the body.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en199" id="en199r">17</a> Since ASL is a language that cannot be separated from the body and the corporeal produced anxiety, it is often perceived as <a class="page" id="p69"></a>threatening. It makes defiantly visible the fact that the normative mode of expressive communication—verbal articulation—is not the only way in which linguistic information can be transmitted.</p>

    <p>Late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century attitudes toward manual languages (which were, at that time, not recognized as languages at all) demonstrate the extent to which the vast majority of American society was uncomfortable with having its assumptions about language denaturalized. Paralleling the move in modernist primitivist discourse to associate particular bodies and practices that called attention to the body with prior states of human development, signing deaf individuals, along with people of color and non-Westerners, increasingly found themselves being classified as subhuman.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0302">Deaf Bodies Signifying</h2>

    <p class="paft">Derogatory attitudes toward embodied communication resulted from modern ideas about the “appropriateness” of certain bodies visibly signifying in nonstandardized ways. While reactions to Baker’s performances illustrate the extent to which it was societally acceptable (and even encouraged) for individuals to be interested in attractive women of color using their bodies nonnormatively to communicate, the same was not the case for bodies perceived as disabled. These bodies, the developing field of eugenics insisted, needed to be hidden from view wherever possible, if not altogether eliminated. Sign languages, which very visibly call attention to the same bodies that conformist logic would seek to render invisible, was seen to be in direct conflict with this normativizing impulse. This had not, however, always been the case. In the early nineteenth century in America, sign language flourished, particularly after the 1817 creation of the first school for the deaf by Thomas H. Gallaudet and Laurent Clerc, the American Asylum for the Deaf at Hartford, Connecticut, which encouraged manual communication as a means of instruction.</p>

    <p>Despite this interest, by the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, there was a radical change of direction in terms of attitudes toward deaf education, and fierce debates sprung up over the role sign language should play in it. The long-standing belief that manual communication represented an earlier stage in human development was linked with scientific theories to create an argument against it. As the noted anthropologist and early filmmaker Felix-Louis Regnault, a proponent of such arguments, explained, “All savage peoples make recourse to gesture to <a class="page" id="p70"></a>express themselves; their language is so poor it does not suffice to make them understood: plunged in darkness, two savages, as travelers who often witness this fact affirm, can communicate their thoughts, coarse and limited though they are. With primitive man, gesture precedes speech.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en200" id="en200r">18</a> Such ideas firmly situated manual communication as a relic of the past. And unlike primitivist fantasies that identified the past as a site to be mined for ways to evade modern stagnation, detractors of nonverbal expression argued very strongly it should stay there.</p>

    <p>Oralists declared that signing would prevent deaf children from learning to speak, the movement’s primary goal. Connections between manualism and inferiority were made explicit by educators such as Emma Garrett, who declared, “if speech is better for hearing people than barbaric signs, it is better for the deaf.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en201" id="en201r">19</a> Attitudes toward the deaf were intertwined with popular theories about “degenerate” or “inferior” races; as S.&nbsp;G. Davidson wrote in 1898, sign language was “immeasurably inferior to English,” and any “culture dependent upon it must by proportionally inferior.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en202" id="en202r">20</a></p>

    <p>Such arguments also received support from pseudoscientific theories that proposed racial hierarchies and that capitalized on the fierce nationalism and xenophobia of the time. Oralists in particular were quick to characterize those who signed as animalistic. Leis Dudley, one of the founders of the Clarke Institution, described signing deaf students as “young creatures human in shape but only half human in attribute.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en203" id="en203r">21</a> And Susan E. Hull was only one of many oralists who explicitly linked signed languages of the deaf to those used by American Indians, her point being that neither represented full human development. Signing with deaf children, she declared, would “push them back in the world’s history to the infancy of our race, . . . [Because it was the language of] American Indians and other savage tribes,” she insisted that “sons and daughters of this nineteenth century [should not] be content with this”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en204" id="en204r">22</a>—at least, that is, when it came to Anglo deaf children.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en205" id="en205r">23</a></p>

    <p>While there was a brief moment when some Deaf schools did not segregate based on race (Kendall School for the Deaf at Gallaudet University, for example, did not become segregated until 1906), between 1869 (when the North Carolina School for Colored Deaf and Blind was founded) until 1978 (when the last segregated deaf school closed in Louisiana), southern schools for the deaf established either separate buildings or campuses for deaf children of color. While white deaf schools across the country switched to either fully oral or combined methods, schools for children of color continued to instruct their pupils in sign. When <a class="page" id="p71"></a>asked at an 1882 convention of the American Instructors of the Deaf whether his school had made any effort to “teach colored children” using the new oral methods, he replied that “in a separate building, one mile from the main institution, there are thirty colored children . . . with a separate teacher in charge. No instruction has been given in articulation, and none will be given at present.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en206" id="en206r">24</a> As Douglas Baynton summarizes, while schools “throughout the south joined northern schools in pushing deaf people to rise, as they saw it, to become fully human by abjuring sign language, this was apparently not considered as significant a need for deaf people of African descent.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en207" id="en207r">25</a></p>

    <p>While the history of American language politics and attitudes toward individuals perceived to have nonnormative bodies are generally read as separate, what these accounts reveal are the complex ways in which cultural ideals of language and embodiment combined to create communicative norms whose implementation was inconsistent but that had significant consequences for the ways that language was conceptualized. While the regulation of bodies has been much discussed, the relationship of language to that regulation remains undertheorized. This is a significant absence because, as demonstrated by the case of Josephine Baker, ideas about language, bodies, modernity, and primitivism cannot be neatly separated out. Despite this general trend, there were modernist writers and filmmakers who recognized the significance of linguistic regulation on bodies. In the next sections of the chapter, I consider how an understanding of communicative norms can contribute to our readings of Charlie Chaplin’s <i>Modern Times</i> and Sherwood Anderson’s <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0303">Gesturing Back</h2>

    <p class="paft">Just as the rise of oralism challenged embodied forms of communication, the switch from silent films to “talkies” displaced the nonverbal body as the sole or primary means of communicative exchange in cinema. The impact of this switch is perhaps most famously dramatized (and satirized) in Charlie Chaplin’s 1936 <i>Modern Times</i>. From the first exhibited film in 1894 to the release of <i>The Jazz Singer</i> in 1927, the only sounds associated with motion pictures were nonnarrative musical accompaniments. Outside of intertitles, which were used to varying degrees, it was the actors’ responsibility to communicate plot and dialogue through body language. Indeed, it was precisely their ability to effectively transmit information through gesture and facial expression that made them famous.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p72"></a>The move to talkies saw the effective end of the careers of many early silent-film stars, while others struggled to adapt. The longest holdout against this shift was Charlie Chaplin, whose fame, wealth, and unprecedented creative control over his projects enabled him to resist until <i>The Great Dictator</i>, released in 1940, more than a decade after spoken-dialogue films became the industry standard. Chaplin initially had no interest in talking pictures. He complained to the periodical <i>Motion Pictures</i> that talkies were “spoiling the oldest art in the world—the art of pantomime. They are ruining forever the great beauty of silence. . . . It is beauty that matters in pictures—nothing else. The screen is pictorial.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en208" id="en208r">26</a> <i>The Great Dictator</i> thematically addresses the distasteful power of the voice in cinema through its parody of Adolf Hitler and his manipulation of mass media through what many people described as the hypnotic power of his voice.</p>

    <p>In <i>Modern Times</i>, the final (quasi-) silent film Chaplin made, he addresses the move to spoken-dialogue pictures and the assumptions undergirding the notion that spoken language is an inherently superior mode of communication both thematically and structurally. The film follows the story of a factory worker who finds himself subject to intense regulation in a series of specifically modern ways. After suffering a mental breakdown caused by the stresses of industrial labor, he is forcibly taken to a psychiatric hospital. Upon his release, he is mistaken for a communist labor leader and imprisoned. Throughout the film, the worker is on the run from authority figures that seek to normativize his deviant body. Along the way, he meets up with a young women attempting to evade a version of child protective services, which wants to send her to an orphanage after the death of her father. Together, the pair devises schemes for finding food and earning money. Ultimately incapable of conforming, they end the film walking off into the sunset of a dusty mountainous landscape, in what has been read as either a liberating escape from the confines of modern city life or a kind of death.</p>

    <p>One of the most notable things about the film is its treatment of language, specifically its attention to embodied communication. The film’s first sequence, which audiences in 1936 might reasonably have expected to include spoken dialogue, takes place in the factory. We are introduced to the worker on the assembly line, mechanically twisting rivets. Unlike his peers, the protagonist struggles to keep up with the speed of the line as his bodily urges—scratching, swatting an insect, sneezing—cause him to fall behind at the same time they call attention to the body qua body. His interactions with other workers occur in silence, but in each <a class="page" id="p73"></a>exchange it is entirely clear what is being communicated: displeasure at Chaplin’s character’s inability to keep up, the trading of insults, the protagonist blaming another worker when the boss comes to chastise him for having to halt the production line. <i>Modern Times</i>, that is, opens with Chaplin demonstrating the ability of the body to effectively communicate in the absence of spoken language.</p>

    <p>Despite the film’s emphasis on silent communication, it is not entirely devoid of human speech. To make his point about its limitations, Chaplin allows the human voice to appear only when mediated through technology. The boss of the factory speaks to workers through a giant CCTV-style screen. The inventor describes his automated eating machine through a gramophone. Significantly, none of the characters that employ verbal speech in the film are particularly sympathetic, and none of the information they convey in this manner is of any great significance. Rather, the mediation serves to demonstrate the inhumanity of such communication. When the protagonist finally does vocalize—the first time Chaplin’s voice had been heard in a film—it is to sing a song constructed of nonsense, bits of various languages along with a great deal of gibberish.</p>

    <p>This climactic final scene, in which the song appears, is structured around a rejection of specific verbal utterances. The gamin, having become a popular dancer at a local café, has secured a job for the worker, provided he can sing in the evening’s show. In order to remember the words of his song, the worker has the gamin write them out on his cuffs. As he dances, however, the cuffs fly off, and he is left wordless before an increasingly restless audience and looking helplessly at the gamin. “Sing!!” Her response is presented on intertitles as she points to her mouth and face. “Never mind the words.” The gamin’s gestures contribute to the idea that what is important is still the body, the face of the worker in the performance, rather than the lyrics themselves. The worker follows her advice, giving the café patrons their dinner performance, and Chaplin demonstrates his ability both to sing and to use the new technology of sound to his audience; but rather than illustrating the superiority of speech, the performance provides an example of the power of voice detached from semantic content. What makes it successful within the film as well as on a meta level is not the words (which make no sense) but the nonlinguistic ways in which Chaplin’s body signifies, the fact of the voice as part of that physicality.</p>

    <p><i>Modern Times</i> has been critiqued for its rather blunt commentary on capitalism, but the analysis it provides of the danger of communicative <a class="page" id="p74"></a>norms is incredibly sophisticated. At a time when very few people were drawing connections between linguistic standardization and norms of embodiment, Chaplin’s worker dramatically demonstrates the dangerous consequences, both for the individual and for society, of forcing bodies to express themselves in standardized ways. The mediated speech of the factory boss and the inventor are pointedly dehumanizing. It is not just that the assembly lines turned people into cogs in machines—an argument that was being made elsewhere, most famously by Karl Marx—but that this process was intimately linked to language. Despite the assumptions being made in other contexts about the significance of standardized verbal communication, here speech functions as the butt of the joke, serving to draw our attention to a character’s ignorance rather than his or her skill or intelligence.</p>

    <p>One of the more comical presentations of this idea comes in the bathroom scene, in which the tramp’s cigarette break is cut short by the appearance of his boss’s face on a giant screen. This is one of the few places in the film where verbal and nonverbal communication are directly juxtaposed. Having just lit his cigarette by striking the match on his butt in a gesture that draws attention to his body, the worker is interrupted by the boss, who barks, “Hey! Quit stalling. Get back to work. Go on!” The worker replies with arm movements—shrugging his shoulders, gesturing to the sink to suggest that he was just washing up—that are less powerful than the language of the boss (which the worker is compelled to obey) but that enable the worker to clearly communicate what he means and that, significantly, are depicted as more human (and humane) than the technologically mediated speech.</p>

    <p>This pattern—the automated machines, or humans in positions of power functioning as and through machines, quashing individuality represented by nonconformist embodiment—is repeated throughout the film, with consequences that teeter on the edge between comedy and tragedy. When Chaplin’s worker returns to work after his bathroom break and gets into the rhythm of the assembly line, he finds himself unable to stop and experiences physical tics even when he has left the line to go on his next break. Henri Bergson famously defined the comic as a situation in which a human behaves in such a way as to appear machine-like, and these sequences have often been cited as illustrative of precisely this dynamic.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en209" id="en209r">27</a> But funny as they are, the threat underlying them is clear. Chaplin’s worker becomes so mindlessly caught up in the production line that when he falls behind, he dives head first into the machine in order to continue twisting his rivets. The magic of cinema enables this <a class="page" id="p75"></a>to produce one of the film’s best-known images: that of Chaplin winding his way through the gears of the machine before it is reversed and he is brought back up. But there is a discomfort in the humor, emphasized by the reaction of his fellow worker, who desperately tries to prevent Chaplin from jumping into the machine, recognizing that, in the logic of the noncinematic world, such an act constitutes suicide.</p>

    <p>And while the worker emerges from the machine physically unharmed, he does suffer a mental breakdown. Obsessed with the notion of twisting, he chases two women whose dresses have large buttons (one on the butt and the other on the breasts) that he mistakes for rivets, attempting to assault them. Again, the threat (here of a specifically sexual nature) lurks barely beneath the surface of the comedy. The regulation of bodies and language, <i>Modern Times</i> demonstrates, can have catastrophic consequences on individuals, as well as on society more broadly. The solution provided in the film—the series of punitive institutions that the character is thrown in when he cannot perform normatively—masks the structural nature of the problem by assigning it to the individual in an enactment of the medical model. Just as he was put in a police van after wandering into a protest earlier in the film, at the end of this scene the worker is tossed into an ambulance. The institutions are barely distinguished and, as we might expect given that the worker’s difficulties arise from problems inherent to the structure of society rather than individual deviance, prove equally ineffectual.</p>

    <p>For Chaplin, far from being a throwback to a primitivist fantasy of the past, embodied communication functioned as an effective contemporary means to challenge these regulatory pressures as well as to call attention to their dangers. Within the film, spoken language is presented as yet another way in which individual bodies become mechanized and standardized. Its status is not accepted as an inherent truth, as was the case in most early twentieth-century contexts, but rather is something in the process of being negotiated in an ongoing and decidedly political struggle. The intertwining of linguistic and other kinds of regulatory standards provides one of the film’s most nuanced critiques of modern times, one that has been surprisingly overlooked by generations of critics who have largely assented to the belief that physical communication does indeed belong to a moment in the past and that Chaplin’s engagement of it, even when successfully executed, can only signify a kind of primitivist nostalgia.</p>

    <p>One of the few Chaplin critics to recognize the flaw with this argument was, somewhat unexpectedly, Winston Churchill, who had met <a class="page" id="p76"></a>Chaplin when the actor was visiting London. In an article for <i>Collier’s</i> in 1935, the future prime minister describes how Chaplin developed his pantomime skills while touring the Channel Islands and performing for an audience who spoke a Norman French patois and could therefore not understand the spoken language of the company. Intrigued by the power of embodied communication to bridge such gaps, Churchill argues that “pantomime, of which [Chaplin] is a master, is capable of expressing every emotion, of communicating the subtlest shades of meaning. A man who can act with his whole body has no need of words whatever part he plays.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en210" id="en210r">28</a></p>

    <p>Rather than suggesting that the voice serves as a pale imitation of spoken language that traffics only in crude approximations or fetishizing it as did so many of his contemporaries, Churchill recognizes the ability of nonverbal bodily communication to transmit subtle shades of meaning, equal to the nuance of oral language. Crucially for our purposes, he also rejects the popular logic that linked such physical communication to the past and aligned verbal speech with the future. Churchill notes,</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">It is a favorite cliché of film critics, in discussing talking pictures to say that we cannot go back. In effect, they suggest that because technical progress has given us sound, all films must be talkies and will continue to be so forever. Such statements reveal a radical misconception of the nature of progress and the nature of art. As well say that, because there is painting in oils, there must be no etchings; or that because speech is an integral part of a stage play, dialogue must be added to ballet. To explore the possibilities of the non-talking film, to make of it a new and individual art form, would not be a retrograde step, but an advance.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en211" id="en211r">29</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Here, Churchill demonstrates remarkable insight into the notion of verbal speech as just one in a series of modes of effective expression. Unfortunately, his vision of a future in which film could maintain a wide range of communicative options that need not include standardized verbal communication proved short-lived; Chaplin did not go on to make the serious silent films that Churchill imagined. Just three years after Churchill’s article, Chaplin had begun filming on what was to be his first spoken-language feature film. But the article intriguingly explores some of the potential for nonverbal expression at a time just before speech monopolized the cinema.</p>

    <p>For Churchill, part of the draw of embodied communication, rather succinctly expressed in the title of one of the sections of his article— “Gesture <a class="page" id="p77"></a>More Effective than the Voice”—is its presumed universality. He imagines the importance of new silent films primarily for individuals from countries that do not have the financial resources to produce films in their own languages or even to rewire existing cinemas for sound. Moreover, as he puts it, “the primitive mind thinks more easily in pictures than in words. . . . They [silent films] will promote, or destroy, the prestige by which the white man maintains his precarious supremacy amid the teeming multitudes of black and brown and yellow.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en212" id="en212r">30</a></p>

    <p>Here, Churchill reenacts the same tension between ideas of embodiment that were rehearsed in discussions of Josephine Baker, as well as in the rationale for instructing deaf children of color in sign while converting schools for white deaf children to oral methods: even as early twentieth-century thinkers seemed enormously desirous of celebrating the body as a kind of modernist ideal for breaking with standards, they remained incapable of entirely excising from their ideas about it the primitivist association between embodiment and othered peoples and cultures. Through a kind of cultural cognitive discourse, the embrace of the body functioned simultaneously as celebrated marker of a new age determined to shed the hang-ups of the past and as evidence of an ongoing commitment to those same hang-ups.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0304">Modernism and Gesture</h2>

    <p class="paft">This conflicted attitude about bodies and communication—on the one hand celebrating their productive potential, on the other engaging in primitivist logic about their functionality—was shared by many literary critics who attempted to locate in physical communication a useful alternative to dominant modes of spoken language but who were unable entirely to escape from problematic perceptions of embodiment. At the same time that avant-garde poetics were pushing for a technologized, dehumanized aesthetic, the increasing visibility of bodies on screens, in magazines and newspapers, and in rapidly urbanizing metropolises around the world was difficult to ignore.</p>

    <p>The influential New Critic R.&nbsp;P. Blackmur’s 1952 <i>Language as Gesture</i> offers a take on the subject from the perspective of literary criticism, celebrating gesture while simultaneously complicating its relationship to the body. For Blackmur, gesture functions primarily as nonsemantic meaning behind and around words. “Gesture, in language,” he explains, “is the outward and dramatic play of inward and imaged meaning. It is that play of meaningfulness among words which cannot be defined in <a class="page" id="p78"></a>the formula in the dictionary.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en213" id="en213r">31</a> It both comes before language and is the cherry on top of linguistic communication, in either case, not necessarily tied to the physical body.</p>

    <p>Blackmur emphasizes this point by drawing examples of gesture from various fine and plastic arts. “It is gesture,” for example, “that makes a stone figure a sphinx, and it is gesture that makes the great Sphinx a smile.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en214" id="en214r">32</a> In this formulation, gesture is imagined as specifically disembodied; it signifies something like a spirit that resides in the process of artistic creation or in the art object but not in the embodied human subject. This is perhaps most clear when Blackmur cites a passage from <i>Hamlet</i>, which he identifies as illustrative of the way gesture reinvigorates language. “Do not these words rise from what is past and fall toward what is coming, and both rise and fall as a gesture, almost his last, out of Hamlet himself?” he inquires. “We see how order and cadence and the ear of the poet give the actor all that he has to do except that most arduous thing, put the gesture in the words into the gesture of his mere voice and body.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en215" id="en215r">33</a> By situating gesture in the act of artistic creation that produces the language (or in the language itself), the creator as embodied subject is specifically elided from this account.</p>

    <p>At other points, however, Blackmur it very much interested in the vitality of bodies. Discussing gesture as the necessary solution to his friend’s writer’s block, he provides the following advice:</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">What he has to do is to forget the whole theory of stenography or reporting and make the words of his pen do not only what the words of his mouth did, but also, and most of all, what they failed to do at those crucial moments when he went off into physical gesture with face and hands and vocal gesture in shifting inflections. . . . Since what is being played with is meanings and congeries of meanings, what is wanted cannot be articulated in a formula, but on the other hand it cannot be articulated at all except when delivered within a form.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en216" id="en216r">34</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Here, it is specifically the physical face, hands, and throat that enable gesture, even if the body is somewhat unceremoniously transmuted into form. However much as Blackmur may try to sublimate the physical into such bland descriptors, it is physicality that enables words to “go beyond their normal meanings” and “become gesture.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en217" id="en217r">35</a></p>

    <p>The way in which gesture becomes a sliding signified between the embodied and the disembodied for Blackmur is indicative of the fraught relationship that many modernists had with the idea of corporeality and <a class="page" id="p79"></a>that high modernist literature had with forms of art and entertainment such as jazz music or dance that specifically foregrounded the (othered) body. There is a repeated attempt in Blackmur’s account to turn gesture into something abstract, but as his inability to entirely detach it from its embodied roots demonstrates, it is precisely this foundation that give gesture the subversive force that he is seeking. This attempt to separate the idea of gesture from the body gesturing is yet another reminder of both the widespread discomfort with physicality that governed communicative regulation at the beginning of the twentieth century and the problematic ways our analysis of literary experimentation tends to gloss over the social and physical ramifications of it. This elision also represents a missed opportunity in terms of imagining experimental linguistic alternatives. As <i>Modern Times</i> demonstrates, if bodies and language are inextricably intertwined in the policies that seek to enforce communicative norms, so too are they linked in the subversive practices that undermine them. Sherwood Anderson’s <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> takes up this idea, illustrating the wide-reaching social effects of such regulation and specifically positing a return to ancient storytelling practices as a means to reestablish the link between language and embodied community.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0305">Communicative Freak Show</h2>

    <p class="paft">Like Chaplin’s film, a silent anomaly in a world of sound, <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>’s engagement with small-town life over the bustle of the metropolis functions for many people as a kind of anachronism. While sharing with so-called high modernism (and with Chaplin) a commitment to both technical innovation and resisting standardization, Anderson’s book blends this formal experimentation with a more explicit thematic interest in the body. By highlighting the constructedness of communicative norms as well as their damaging effects, Anderson denaturalizes language practices that were widely assumed to be inherent. He employs the figure of the storyteller to suggest a means of challenging standardization that involves blending elements of modern literary practice with those of oral traditions in order to subvert norms by emphasizing individual bodies and their idiosyncratic ways of using language.</p>

    <p><i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> consists of a series of interconnecting stories of characters that Anderson refers to as “grotesques.” Grotesques have a long history in literature of representing the common or folk elements of human life. As Mikhail Bakhtin has argued, the representation of the everyday often serves a transgressive function because “the grotesque . . . discloses <a class="page" id="p80"></a>the potentiality of an entirely different world, of another order, another way of life.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en218" id="en218r">36</a> While modern thought had begun to redefine individuals who deviated from the standard in this way as abnormal and in need of regulation, Anderson reconstitutes the grotesque according to its earlier meaning as representative not of a fringe minority but, because no one entirely matches the standard, of the shared human condition.</p>

    <p>To further emphasize the point, Anderson’s grotesques are defined not only by idiosyncratic (and potentially essential) physicality but also through a kind of logical fallacy. As he explains in the text’s introductory story, “The Book of the Grotesques,” grotesques are people who become twisted through their obsession with definitive truths: “the moment one of the people took one of the truths to himself, called it his truth, and tried to live his life by it, he became a grotesque and the truth he embraced became a falsehood.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en219" id="en219r">37</a> The book is thus framed by the idea that a preoccupation with such truths, the belief that one has discovered the one and only “right” answer or way to deal with a situation (what we might call a standard), is destructive. Here, Anderson turns accepted thinking on its head; what is grotesque is not the “aberrant” physical body but rather the conformist thinking that would seek to standardize it. Rather than constituting a deviant minority, for Anderson, the grotesque is a category that can, that indeed does, include everyone.</p>

    <p>In “Godliness,” the narrator links the development of such grotesque thinking to the proliferation of print media and the linguistic standardization that accompanied it. “Books, badly imagined and written though they may be in the hurry of our times, are in every household, magazines circulate by the millions of copies, newspapers are everywhere,” he complains. “Much of the old brutal ignorance that had in it also a kind of beautiful childlike innocence,” a sense of individuality, “is gone forever.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en220" id="en220r">38</a> <i>Winesburg</i> celebrates individuality by presenting the stories of people out of step with this drive toward what was defined as progress. Through character studies that explore people’s diverse imperfections, Anderson demonstrates the folly of assuming that there is a singular way of being or that this is a goal we should strive to achieve.</p>

    <p>The sheer number of characters in <i>Winesburg</i> who do not fit easily into the confines of these standards serves to denaturalize them. Significantly, much of the distinctness of the townspeople is related to their style of communication. Joe Welling, for example, stands out because he speaks more than is considered normal. These overwhelming outbursts are presented as uncomfortable and are repeatedly associated in the story with physical distinctness. Welling is described as being “small of <a class="page" id="p81"></a>body and in his character unlike anyone else in town.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en221" id="en221r">39</a> His manner of speech frustrates even the descriptive efforts of the narrator, who does not know precisely what to say about him. Welling is first characterized as “a tiny little volcano that lies silent for days and then suddenly spouts fire,” before the narrator decides that he is actually more “like a man who is subject to fits.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en222" id="en222r">40</a> Significantly, this latter description translates the power of Joe’s nonnormative speech into the rhetoric of disability.</p>

    <p>The reader is left in a similar position of not knowing quite what to do with Joe’s speech. As the narrator explains, Joe “was beset by ideas and in the throes of one of his ideas was uncontrollable. Words rolled and tumbled from his mouth.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en223" id="en223r">41</a> Structurally, these words repeatedly threaten to take over the story, running on and on, bouncing from one idea to the next with only the slimmest pretense of connection. In reading these passages, in which Joe philosophizes about Wine Creek or decay, the reader is put in the position of the other characters, wishing that Joe would be quiet, that he would more closely approximate the norm.</p>

    <p>Ultimately, however, Anderson reveals that this communicative oddity proves to be an asset. It makes Joe a highly successful baseball coach by confusing the opposing team, and it allows him to overcome the hostility of Tom and Edward King when Joe attempts to woo Sarah King. Because Joe does not engage with or recognize normative conversational modes, he remains oblivious to the hostility of the two men, who arrive angry and armed to insist that he stop seeing Sarah. By speaking to them in his idiosyncratic and highly excitable way, Joe is able to diffuse the tension and win them over without ever recognizing (or at least acknowledging) the danger. The story ends with the three walking back to see Sarah, with Tom and Edward struggling to keep up with Joe’s quick pace.</p>

    <p>Characters’ unique speech habits do not always function in <i>Winesburg</i> to resolve conflict. Elmer Cowley’s inability to express his frustration at being perceived as queer, for example, frequently translates into bursts of violence. In response to a traveling salesman, whose goods, Elmer believes, will contribute to his family’s financial decline, Elmer can only communicate his ideas by brandishing a rifle and shrieking. “Everyone stands around and laughs and they talk but they say nothing to me,” he later complains. “Then I feel so queer that I can’t talk either. I go away. I don’t say anything. I can’t.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en224" id="en224r">42</a> When he finally does manage to confront George Willard, whom he sees as representing the condescending townspeople, he is able to speak but only by simultaneously moving his body. When he tried to talk, “his arms began to pump up and down. His face worked spasmodically.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en225" id="en225r">43</a> Attempting to force his ideas (and body) <a class="page" id="p82"></a>into normative postures is so difficult for Elmer that the strain manifests itself in physical tics.</p>

    <p>Seth Richardson also fails to behave and speak according to convention. His mother is both frustrated and awed by this deviance: “She expected from all people certain conventional reactions to life. A boy was your son, you scolded him and he trembled and looked at the floor. When you had scolded enough he wept and all was forgiven. . . . Virginia Richmond could not understand why her son did not do these things.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en226" id="en226r">44</a> It is not Seth’s specific behavior, that is, but rather his refusal (or inability) to conform to the convention that befuddles his mother. It also complicates her own actions by making it impossible for her to react according to societal scripts, which causes her no end of difficulties as a parent. When Seth returns after disappearing for a week with some friends, for example, Virginia’s planned reprimands unravel in the face of his direct and unashamed explanations. As these characters’ interactions reveal, deviation from the norm impacts not only the individual but all those around him as well. Once a person fails to buy in, the whole system is put in danger of collapse. The outreaching effects of Seth’s deviance shine light on some of the motivations behind the effort put into regulating the use of signed and other minority languages.</p>

    <p>This policing applied not only to what one said but also to what one did not say. Much of Seth’s distinctiveness in particular is expressed by his silence. While his mother wants to read this silence as indicative of deep thought or grand plans, Seth insists that he merely has no desire to engage in the idle chatter he observes around him. “‘Everyone talks and talks,’ he tells Helen White. ‘I’m sick of it. I’ll do something, get into some kind of work where talk don’t count.’”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en227" id="en227r">45</a> For Seth, idle chatter, people “perpetually talking of nothing,” is what is wrong with the town. It drives a wedge between him and George Willard, who Seth asserts “belongs to this town,” as well as between him and Helen White.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en228" id="en228r">46</a></p>

    <p>Seth is initially drawn to Helen by her own communicative distinctness. When the two are children, Helen writes Seth copious quantities of notes, tucking them into his possessions at school or sending them through the post. That Seth never replies to these notes does not deter Helen, and it is her acceptance of this alternative mode of communication (or lack of overt communication) that Seth finds appealing. He even allows himself to imagine staying in the town in order to be with her, walking together in silence. Ultimately, however, he decides that she is part of the town in a way he feels he is not. He imagines that Helen will end up with someone like George Willard, “who talks a lot,” and <a class="page" id="p83"></a>will therefore start to become “embarrassed and feel strange” when he is around.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en229" id="en229r">47</a></p>

    <p>Like Seth, Enoch Robinson’s communicative distinctiveness leaves him isolated from the people around him. As the narrator explains at the beginning of his story, for Enoch “nothing ever turned out” because “he couldn’t understand people and he couldn’t make people understand him.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en230" id="en230r">48</a> For a time, Enoch appears to be very successful. He moves to New York City, where he marries, has children, and hosts an artists’ salon. He becomes overwhelmed, however, by the conversations of the people he has surrounded himself with. “Leaning back in their chairs, they talked and talked with their heads rocking from side to side,” he observes. “Words were said about line and values and composition, lots of words, such as are always being said.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en231" id="en231r">49</a> Enoch initially tries to participate in these conversations but “didn’t know how. He was too excited to talk coherently. When he tried he sputtered and stammered and his voice sounded strange and squeaky to him. That made him stop talking.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en232" id="en232r">50</a> Enoch has ideas to contribute to these discussions, but his perception that his own style of speech is nonnormative keeps him from fully engaging.</p>

    <p>As an alternative, Enoch “began to invent his own people to whom he could really talk and to whom he explained the things he had been unable to explain to living people.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en233" id="en233r">51</a> After a while, he decides that he prefers the company of these imaginary friends, with whom he can be “self-confident and bold,” to the people in his life, and he retreats from society and leaves his wife.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en234" id="en234r">52</a> He attempts to connect with a young woman by explaining the significance of his fantasy friends, but his emotion frightens her away. The imaginary people leave with her, and Enoch dejectedly returns to Winesburg. While he had once longed to go home, the desertion of his friends makes the return bitter. Once in Winesburg, he finds himself unable to communicate with anyone other than George Willard, the town reporter, whose job and experiences serve as a link between many of the stories.</p>

    <p>Like Enoch, Louise Bentley also does not know how to express herself in ways that make sense to others, and her failure similarly drives her into isolation. Described as “neurotic” and “oversensitive,” Louise is born into a house notably devoid of emotional connection, a cycle she repeats with her son, David.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en235" id="en235r">53</a> As a young girl, Louise was singled out as odd because of her intelligence, and she never works her way back from that outsider status. As the narrator explains, “It seemed to her that between herself and all the other people in the world, a wall had been built up <a class="page" id="p84"></a>and that she was living just on the edge of some warm inner circle of life that must be quite open and understandable to others.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en236" id="en236r">54</a> She tries to form a connection with her husband by explaining herself honestly, but her efforts are “always without success. Filled with his own notions of love between men and women,” John Hardy is unable to understand or appropriately respond to Louise’s unconventional ideas.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en237" id="en237r">55</a> Ultimately, she stops trying to bridge the gap and retreats into eccentricity.</p>

    <p>Ironically, it is this inability to communicate with one another that most strongly links the characters in <i>Winesburg</i>; rather than representing individual deviance, it is what they share. The fact that so few in Winesburg are able to achieve the kinds of connections with others that Louise strives for using conventional speech demonstrates that the walls that frustrate her are symptomatic not of the problems of individuals but of a society whose prescribed modes of communication do not accommodate the diverse needs of its population. Despite rising pressures at the time for bodies to conform lest they be classified as deviant (or, to use Enoch’s word, “queer”), Anderson’s descriptions of these characters are remarkably lacking in pathology. By emphasizing the proliferation of communicative differences within the town, and by occasionally even exploring the productive aspects of these differences, he shifts the focus away from the idea of “flawed” individuals and onto the problematic expectation that individuals should all communicate in a singular way.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en238" id="en238r">56</a></p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0306">Telling Stories</h2>

    <p class="paft">Having thus denaturalized communicative standards, Anderson sets about imagining potential solutions. For him, key to resisting communicative norms was the development of the figure of the storyteller, which functions as a subversive presence within his work. Anderson was not the only early twentieth-century writer who experimented with the role of storytelling; Edgar Lee Masters’s 1915 <i>Spoon River Anthology</i>, for example, follows a similar structure to <i>Winesburg</i> in order to give a glimpse into the gritty, unidealized lives of people from a fictional town.</p>

    <p>What makes Anderson’s take on storytelling unique is that it presents this storytelling as a response to the very modern problem of communicative norms. It is this element that keeps Anderson’s interest in the storyteller from devolving into mere primitivism or “nostalgic impulse[].”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en239" id="en239r">57</a> His perspective on storytelling was not one shared by many of his contemporaries. For many people, the dawn of the twentieth century was perceived as an opportunity to violently break with the past. This included <a class="page" id="p85"></a>previously popular literary techniques, which were now seen as not only dated but regressive. E.&nbsp;M. Forster summarized the presumed connection between storytelling and primitive thinking in <i>Aspects of the Novel</i>:</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">The more we look at the story . . . the less shall we find to admire. It runs like a backbone—or may I say a tape-worm, for its beginning and end are arbitrary. It is immensely old—goes back to Neolithic times, perhaps to Paleolithic. Neanderthal man listened to stories, if one may judge by the shape of his skull. The primitive audience was an audience of shock-heads, gaping round the camp-fire, fatigued with contending against the mammoth or the woolly rhinoceros, and only kept awake by suspense. What would happen next? The novelist droned on, and as soon as the audience guessed what happened next, they either fell asleep or killed him.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en240" id="en240r">58</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Forster’s description demonstrates not only a contemporary distaste for storytelling but an outright disdain for it. As the passage suggests, this was primarily because of its intimate connection to the physical body, to the ways narrative was once shaped by the desires of an audience, desires that were physical as well as intellectual (the need to overcome audience fatigue with excitement). This kind of communal storytelling, with its insistent present-ing of the body, is something from which at least one strand of modernist writing was committed to distancing itself.</p>

    <p>Anderson, however, remained fixated on the figure of the storyteller throughout his career. “I am in my nature a teller of tales,” he explains in “The Modern Writer,” and tales, storytelling, chants, and songs constitute the single most prominent theme in his body of work.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en241" id="en241r">59</a> While also embracing formal experimentation, for Anderson the act of storytelling represented not a submissiveness to standard forms but rather a powerful tool of resistance against the standardization that paralyzes so many of the characters in <i>Winesburg</i>. Rather than rejecting (or celebrating) the figure as an ancient relic, Anderson emphasizes its modern relevance. Far from representing a “no longer feasible, decidedly obsolete sociocultural ideal,” storytelling is presented as a means to showcase the value of diverse individuality, to connect what had been valuable about older traditions with new models of literature and the new political situation in which modernist writers found themselves.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en242" id="en242r">60</a> Karl Kroeber expresses a similar interpretation of the social function of storytelling in <i>Retelling/Rereading</i>: “Genuine storytelling is inherently antiauthoritarian, . . . for stories are told only by individuals, not groups. Inherent to all such individuation is the potentiality for subversion, especially because a story <a class="page" id="p86"></a>is ‘received’ by individuals, no matter how large and homogeneous the audience of a telling, each of whom simply by interpreting for himself or herself may introduce unauthorized understanding—all the more dangerous if unintended.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en243" id="en243r">61</a> By drawing our attention to the disastrous consequences of conformity for individual characters, Anderson’s stories similarly function to highlight individuality and, more specifically, individual bodies. Storytelling produces spaces in which those bodies can interact with one another in and around language. Intriguingly, contemporary storytelling societies bear out the idea that this mode of interaction, rather than representing a throwback, continues to serve a valuable subversive function.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en244" id="en244r">62</a></p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0307">A Story of Hands</h2>

    <p class="paft">Anderson discusses the potentially transformative power of storytelling experiences throughout <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>, but nowhere are the social implications of these strategies explored more thoroughly than in “Hands,” the story that begins the cycle and that first introduces readers to George Willard. “Hands” tells the story of Adolph Myers, a “fat little old man” who has relocated to Winesburg and been renamed Wing Biddlebaum after being run out of his Pennsylvania town following accusations of inappropriate conduct toward his male students.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en245" id="en245r">63</a> The details of these encounters are left vague; the only things the reader is told explicitly are that Biddlebaum does not understand the anger of his pupils’ parents and that he often uses his hands to express himself: “Wing Biddlebaum talked much with his hands. The slender expressive fingers, forever active, forever striving to conceal themselves in his pockets or behind his back, came forth and became the piston rods of his machinery of expression.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en246" id="en246r">64</a></p>

    <p>“Hands” has been read by recent critics as a parable about the stifling power of sexual norms and the fierce reaction against perceived homosexuality in small-town America. As Thomas Yingling argues in his influential article “The End of Collective Experience,” “Hands” depicts “homosexual panic and . . . the privilege of self-assured heterosexual men to mark and brutalize those who differ from them in appearance, speech, and behavior.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en247" id="en247r">65</a> The text’s most obvious insinuation for contemporary readers is, indeed, that Biddlebaum’s difference can be understood in terms of his sexuality, which is deemed so deviant that he is forced first to flee and then to live the rest of his life strictly regulating his behavior. This reading provides valuable insight into the devastating <a class="page" id="p87"></a>effects of enforced norms on noncompliant individuals and fits well with the theme of sexual and gender policing that runs throughout the text.</p>

    <p>The story does not, however, make clear whether Biddlebaum is in fact sexually interested in men (his students or any others). Biddlebaum himself gives no sign that he recognizes such desires. Yingling interprets this lack of recognition as “further evidence . . . of how successfully repressed are these desires,” but it is also possible that it is simply evidence of the lack of such desires, that Biddlebaum’s uniqueness can be located not (or not only) in his sexuality but in the nonnormative linguistic practices that are the only definitive evidence of his difference within the book.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en248" id="en248r">66</a> That one difference might be confused with the other is unsurprising. Ideas about what bodies should and should not be doing, after all, govern both sexual and communicative norms.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en249" id="en249r">67</a></p>

    <p>While assumptions about Biddlebaum’s abilities and linguistic practices are linked to ideas about his sexuality, however, the two are not synonymous. Given our lack of vocabulary for discussing communicative norms even today, it makes sense that we, like the Pennsylvania townspeople in the story, map our reading of Biddlebaum’s difference onto a concept more readily at hand: that of apparently transgressive sexuality. But the text very significantly never clarifies the nature of Biddlebaum’s touching of his students. Indeed, it emphasizes that the specific allegations of fondling are the inventions of an intellectually disabled young man who, having developed a crush on the teacher, confuses fantasy with reality: “In his bed at night he imagined unspeakable things and in the morning went forth to tell his dreams as facts.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en250" id="en250r">68</a></p>

    <p>The testimony of the other students suggests that Biddlebaum did touch them—“He put his arms around me. . . . His fingers were always playing in my hair”—but does not explain whether either the boys or Biddlebaum understood these interactions as sexual in nature, much less whether Biddlebaum’s habit of speaking with his hands is indicative of his sexuality.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en251" id="en251r">69</a> The only definitive deviance that Biddlebaum demonstrates in the text is the perceived excessive physicality of his language, which sexuality is not the only (or necessarily the best) framework for interrogating. Given that more than a century after the events depicted in <i>Winesburg</i> it is still widely assumed that standardized verbal speech is the only legitimate mode of communication, it is critical to interrogate these ideas to gain a fuller understanding of not only Anderson’s text but also the political and social realities of individuals who, like Biddlebaum, communicate in ways deemed unacceptable.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p88"></a>In addressing these issues, Anderson is not only ahead of his time but in some ways ahead of our own. Demonstrating surprising insight into the value of diverse communicative strategies, Anderson emphasizes how it is Biddlebaum’s attempt to restrain his hands, to communicate “normally,” rather than some inherent quality, that reduces him to a shell of a man, “forever frightened and beset by a ghostly band of doubts” and isolated from the others in Winesburg.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en252" id="en252r">70</a> Biddlebaum’s shattered character provides one of the text’s most poignant explorations of the long-term effects of enforced communicative conformity. This figure is sharply contrasted with the powerful speaker Biddlebaum becomes when permitted to express himself in the way he finds most natural. Under his tutelage, his pupils “began also to dream,” and his comments to George about the dangers of conformity and the need to “shut your ears to the roaring of the voices” of the townspeople are piercingly perceptive.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en253" id="en253r">71</a> The story’s poignancy is rooted in the fact that Biddlebaum is unable to apply these ideas to himself.</p>

    <p>Biddlebaum’s hands, like Joe Welling’s explosive speech, are also portrayed as prodigious in other ways. They enable Biddlebaum to pick fruit at a rate that far exceeds anyone else. Because of this, “they became his distinguishing feature, the source of his fame. . . . Winesburg was proud of the hands of Wing Biddlebaum.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en254" id="en254r">72</a> Due to his earlier trauma, however, Biddlebaum cannot interpret his difference, particularly difference related to his hands, as anything other than terrifying: “The hands alarmed their owner. He wanted to keep them hidden away.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en255" id="en255r">73</a> By leaving vague the nature of Biddlebaum’s interaction with his students, and by stressing Biddlebaum’s physical and intellectual capabilities, Anderson perceptively locates the handicap not in Biddlebaum himself but rather in the complex act of self-policing necessitated by the mob violence he encounters. Like Chaplin’s worker, Biddlebaum finds himself out of place in a world that insists on expressive standardization.</p>

    <p>In addition to poignantly illustrating this problem, “Hands” is also the story in which Anderson most directly suggests a solution. Throughout the book, a number of characters are only capable of expressing themselves to George Willard. I described this dynamic earlier in relation to Enoch Robinson, but it is also a sentiment expressed by Wash Williams and Doctor Parcival, among others. For Biddlebaum, the effect of Willard’s presence is physically, as well as psychologically, restorative:</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">In the presence of George Willard, Wing Biddlebaum, who for twenty years had been the town mystery, lost something of his <a class="page" id="p89"></a>timidity, and his shadowy personality, submerged in a sea of doubts, came forth to look at the world, . . . The voice that had been trembling became shrill and loud. The bent figure straightened. With a kind of wriggle, like a fish returned to the brook by a fisherman, Biddlebaum the silent began to talk, striving to put into words the ideas that had been accumulated by his mind during long years of silence.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en256" id="en256r">74</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The one distinguishing feature about Willard to which we might attribute this power to enable others to open up is that he is the town reporter. One way of understanding the situation is that, as the storyteller figure in the text, Willard represents a connection to a tradition of embodied communication that Biddlebaum craves, having been denied by a fiercely normalizing society the kind of physical language with which he feels most comfortable.</p>

    <p>Throughout the book, Willard functions as the modern personification of the storyteller, even if it is in a somewhat fallen form. Seth explicitly links Willard to the behavior and idle chatter of the townspeople, and Elmer Cowley believes that “George Willard . . . belonged to the town, typified the town, represented in his person the spirit of the town.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en257" id="en257r">75</a> Willard is not set apart from the normativizing behavior of those around him. These apparent flaws are actually very much in keeping with Anderson’s theory of the storyteller, whom he perceived as fundamentally intertwined with (and, as I discussed in chapter 1, penetrated by) the people whose stories he told. By serving even in this diluted capacity to share the stories of the people from the town, Willard creates enough of a link to enable various characters, most notably Biddlebaum, to connect to an older and embodied tradition that was more celebratory of diverse forms of expression. In this, Anderson provides a glimmer of hope for his otherwise isolated and largely miserable cast of characters. Reconnecting with this more ancient model of interaction that foregrounded physicality, physicality that by its very nature could never be uniform, suggests a way of reclaiming and celebrating the distinctiveness that, under a regime of standardization, can only function to isolate and disable.</p>

    <p>Reading Anderson within the context of historical attempts to standardize deaf people’s language use through a devaluation of its physicality reveals how striking Anderson’s “story of hands” and its sensitivity to people’s needs to communicate in the form they find most natural was.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en258" id="en258r">76</a> Like Biddlebaum, many deaf children who were forbidden to use <a class="page" id="p90"></a>manual communication (and were therefore denied access to language during the crucial first years of life) suffered long-term cognitive, psychological, and social impairments. These efforts also had a detrimental effect on the children’s education; forced to spend their days practicing speech and lip-reading skills that would, it was argued, allow them to more closely approximate an arbitrary norm meant that there was little time left for education in content areas that would prepare them for successful careers and futures.</p>

    <p>By imagining a very similar scenario, Anderson was able to posit a solution that involved not enforcing standards but rather permitting individual difference, encouraging rather than stigmatizing those who did not conform. For him, storytelling cultures represented a model that would allow for the celebration of these differences by using literature as a site of social interaction that could foreground diverse bodies. In fact, this is precisely what has happened with the development of Deaf culture, which is centered around face-to-face interactions and has a strong tradition of storytelling. Recognizing Anderson’s insightful discussion of these complicated issues provides us a way of reevaluating his work as forward thinking, rather than as a naïve project overly invested in the past. Exploring the idea of communicative norms also provides a new (and highly political) context for understanding modernist linguistic experimentation more broadly.</p>

    <p>What the language politics surrounding early twentieth-century deaf Americans reminds us is that the communicative norms challenged by <i>Modern Times</i> and <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> were not nostalgic attempts to reclaim aspects of a primitivist fantasy of the past but rather a matter of pressing contemporary concern. A great deal of critical work, like so much of modernist fascination with the so-called primitive, has problematically identified these discussions of embodiment as anachronistic. As we continue to work through the meanings of the ways modernist writers and critics have negotiated their shifting relationships to space, time, and modernity, it is vital to remain aware of the specific political agenda that seeks to associate particular ideas or practices with the past in an effort to discredit them.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
