<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="ch06">
    <h1 class="ct"><a class="page" id="p147"></a> <a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">Epilogue: The Textual Body</a></h1>

    <div class="epigraph">
      <p class="ep">The living is. The living communicates. It</p>

      <p class="ep">transforms and reinvents itself in, and through, its</p>

      <p class="ep">own language. The genetic code becomes flesh.</p>

      <p class="ept"><span class="sm" style="font-style: normal; font-size: 16">—Louis Bec,</span> “Life Art”</p>
    </div>

    <p class="pf">As we move further into the twenty-first century, the importance of understanding the implications of visual and embodied languages has only increased, and the insights into them offered by both Deaf and modernist studies become all the more relevant. One of the most dramatic developments in discourses surrounding embodied language occurred on April 14, 2003, when the Human Genome Project (HGP) completed its thirteen-year effort to identify the twenty to twenty-five thousand genes present in human DNA and to sequence their three billion chemical bases. The publication of the genome ushered in an era in which gene sequences can be read, if not yet interpreted, either off a computer screen or in the 130 volumes required to print it in its entirety. And that language of reading has been an important part of the discourse surrounding the HGP in ways that have shaped our understanding of its significance.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en431" id="en431r">1</a> As the National Human Genome Research Institute’s website describes the achievement, “Having the complete sequence of the human genome is similar to having all the pages of a manual needed to make the human body. The challenge now is to determine how to read the contents of these pages.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en432" id="en432r">2</a></p>

    <p>Part of the appeal of the textual metaphor is that it functions at multiple levels. As James C. Wilson explains, the sequence is frequently referred to as the “Book of Life”: “digitization/alphabetization of the genetic body-text has fostered the much used analogy of DNA as a molecular language where the ‘letters’ are bases, the ‘words’ are genes, and the ‘book’ is the complete genome.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en433" id="en433r">3</a> Replication errors, by extension, <a class="page" id="p148"></a>become misspellings or misreadings. These descriptions have provided a useful tool that enables science communicators to explain genetics to a broad audience. But despite the ease of the metaphor, the parallels to textuality have, as Wilson himself notes, limitations.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en434" id="en434r">4</a> At its most basic level, metaphor enables us to understand something unfamiliar (in this case, the genome) through a direct comparison with something we recognize (here, text and the reading practices associated with it). While this is both pragmatic and necessary as a means of navigating novel experiences and contexts, it risks glossing over ways in which the new concept might significantly differ from what we are comparing it to.</p>

    <p>As I have argued throughout the book, modernism offers alternative ways of thinking about reading, interpretation, and, specifically, metaphoric relationality that have deep investments in the embodiment of text. When we talk about reading genetic text, in terms of both the processes our bodies already use to decode genetic information and the understanding we are now trying to develop of these processes, our activities may well be more in line with the interpretive practices necessary to read a difficult modernist poem than an instruction manual. At present, the genome is in some sense both readable and illegible; as in a modernist text, recognizing the constituent parts (words, genes) does not equate to understanding the ways they work together to produce (semantic or corporeal) meaning. The genome represents perhaps the purest example of Hart Crane’s idea of the “genetic” text, which Crane believed would provide “a new <i>word</i>, never before spoken and impossible to actually enunciate.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en435" id="en435r">5</a> Just as conventional spoken language failed to provide satisfactory communicative exchanges in Crane’s poetry, determining the ways our bodies decode genetic information involves working out new approaches for conceptualizing how bodies interact with information we have transcribed as text.</p>

    <p>As I outline in my earlier discussion of his work, Crane understood metaphor as an “organic principle” that connects one thing to another through “associational meanings.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en436" id="en436r">6</a> His interest lay in how this process disrupts authorially dictated meaning (which would restrict reader engagement with text to a kind of scavenger hunt to try and uncover it) by implicitly shifting the meaning-making power onto readers, who bring their own associations to the table. There are ways the analogy fails, but there is a potentially productive parallel in the amount of instability Crane’s conception of metaphor introduces into reading. As it turns out, and like Crane’s own stacked words, genes can have multiple, potentially contradictory meanings. Richard Lewontin and Richard Levins provide one example: “the code sequence <a class="page" id="p149"></a>GTAAGT is sometimes read by the cell as an instruction to insert the amino acids <i>valine</i> and <i>serine</i> in a protein, but sometimes it signals a place where the cell machinery is to cut up and edit the message, and sometimes it may be only a spacer.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en437" id="en437r">7</a> The fact that humans have far fewer genes than most geneticists were expecting (early estimates put the number in the hundred thousands; in reality, we have something like twenty-one thousand, which is less than the number necessary to make a cabbage) means that there are aspects of the reading process that we do not understand. Whether we call that process reading (or decoding, interpreting, or anything else) is itself not the crucial issue. What is important is that we come to understand the complexities of the process, the ways in which it complicates our assumptions about the relationship between signifier and signified. Modernism’s fascination and experimentation with the unexpected ways that parts can combine not only to produce but also to destabilize meaning may well prove useful in thinking through how information is processed, especially when that information is represented as text.</p>

    <p>There is an obvious danger here of pushing a point too far. But whether or not modernist interpretive practices provide helpful ways of thinking about reading the language of genetics, the HGP and the discourse that has surrounded it point to an abiding, indeed increasing, interest in the intersection of bodies and text. The preceding chapters have traced some of the ways that consideration of Deaf culture, history, linguistics, and literature productively bears on these issues, specifically by reframing questions that have been central to the field of modernist studies: the tension between an emerging celebrity culture and theories of impersonality, the apparent paradox of an aesthetic simultaneously fascinated with primitivism and making it new, the juxtaposition and indeterminacy at the heart of modernist difficulty, and the perceived disjunction between imagism and epic in the careers of many prominent modernist writers. In discussing Deaf and disability studies in these contexts, it has been my aim to make the case for the widespread relevance of the field to suggest some nonidentitarian directions in which literary disability studies might move. As conversations surrounding the HGP illustrate, far from being a niche concern of writers and artists at the beginning of the twentieth century, the implications of bodies conceived of as text are likely to shape the direction of scientific developments as well as ethical conversations and art practices surrounding them in the coming century. By excavating modernism’s investments in these ideas, Deaf epistemology reveals surprising ways that modernist studies might contribute to these areas of inquiry.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p150"></a>One place we can already observe this contribution is in art practices that play at the border of the sciences and the humanities, between genetic bodies and words. One of the best known series of such works is Eduardo Kac’s <i>Genesis</i>, described by the artist as “transgenic artwork” that began with the creation of an “artist’s gene” by translating a sentence from the book of Genesis—“Let man have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth”—into Morse code and converting the Morse code into DNA base pairs.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en438" id="en438r">8</a> Like Randy Garber’s <i>Made in Translation</i>, with which I began this book, <i>Genesis</i> highlights the processes of translation and transcription in the transmission of information and the creative potential of what emerges in the spaces of semantic slippage. Kac’s 1999 exhibit of <i>Genesis</i> consisted of a petri dish containing the bacteria, a camera that enabled participation via the Internet, and an ultraviolet light box. People watching online were invited to activate the light, which caused mutations in the bacteria. At the end of the exhibition, the DNA was translated back through Morse code into English. The mutated sentence read: “Let aan have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air and over every living thing that ioves ua eon the earth.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en439" id="en439r">9</a></p>

    <p>The effect of the radiation on the words “man” (aan), “moves” (ioves), and “upon” (ua eon) provides rich interpretive possibilities. Rather than exerting dominion over the fish or fowl, it is man himself that is altered in the reverse translation, through an embodied linguistic process that is linked to movement. The word “moves” itself is morphed into a cypher visually resembling “love.” “Upon,” formerly signifying a fixed point of reference, the location of man, is changed into a word that resembles a temporal marker—“eon”—an extension across geological time. As in “Salt in the Basement,” in which gaps in translation are emphasized in order to encourage reflection on the material specificity of language (the slippage between the father’s explanation of the salt and the boy’s understanding that emerges out of the different ways their languages present information), <i>Genesis</i> highlights the indeterminacy produced through and around processes of translation, particularly as they encounter living organisms. The alteration of “man,” “moves,” and “upon” also points toward a shift in the relationship between humans and the natural world, undercutting the notion that the earth is something inert, a backdrop against which man is free to exert biblically authorized dominion over other living things. Instead, “upon,” the word initially meant to link man to that world, also comes alive, shifting, interpenetrating, in a version of the ecological ethic that Sherwood Anderson gestured toward in his poetry.</p>

    <p><a class="page" id="p151"></a>This first stage of <i>Genesis</i> suggests that at the heart of considerations of (bacterially) embodied language, of living words, lies motion and indeterminacy that, as I discussed in chapters 3 and 4, ASL reveals to be foundationally linked to embodied language. These ideas also drive the second phase of <i>Genesis</i>, in which Kac used a protein produced by the Genesis gene to create three-dimensional sculptures, translating the genetic-text into visual art. This process of increasing dimensions is crucial to what Bec describes in the epigraph to this epilogue as “the genetic text becom[ing] flesh.” In a 2003 news report, the BBC science editor David Whitehouse explained, “An organism’s genome is a two-dimensional and static description of a living creature. To come to life it must be translated into action, rather like a screenplay must be turned into acting.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en440" id="en440r">10</a> What enable that shift are the ways that the “text” is expressed in and through a living body (acting, signing, or just being).</p>

    <p>Throughout <i>Deafening Modernism</i>, I have highlighted some of the pragmatic, ethical, philosophical, relational, political, and aesthetic implications of this interdimensional translation (the new modes of being together that emerge when semantic content cannot be separated from a human body signifying, the literary and artistic forms made possible by a language that moves through three spatial dimensions as well as time). It is the ethical and philosophical consequences of text “coming to life” that motivate this second part of <i>Genesis</i>, titled “Transcription Jewels.” As Kac explains, the piece highlights the commodification of biological material and the “intersemiotic resonances that contribute to expand the historically rich intertextuality between word, image, and spatial form. The process of biological mutation extends it into time.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en441" id="en441r">11</a> Like Valli’s “Dew on a Spiderweb” or Bragg’s “Flowers and Moonlight on the Spring Water,” the apparently fixed visual image is recognized as shifting, fluctuating, temporally expanding not only coincident with these intersections but as a result of them.</p>

    <p>The sculptures’ appearance reinforces these ideas. Set within a wooden box, the first is a gold cast of the model of the protein structure, and the second is a glass bottle containing Genesis DNA. Viewed together, the shape of the glass and the twisting gold of the protein model resemble a genie being released, a visual allusion that resonates at multiple levels. As Kac suggests in the preceding quote, and as the visual reference to mythology supports, the three-dimensional rendering gestures toward temporal extension, both forward (into the future of biotechnology) and backward (to the ancient stories, as well as to the primitive form of life that the bacteria represents). Part of the irony that Kac highlights <a class="page" id="p152"></a>by referencing commodification (the precious glass bottles and gold referred to as jewels) is that the Genesis protein, while alive, is not natural. It is our ability to “read” the bacteria’s DNA that enables the commodification, a process that suggests some of the ethical complications of reading bodies.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en442" id="en442r">12</a></p>

    <p>If bodies can be conceptualized as language—sequenced and even “rewritten”—so too can text be considered alive. In the 2012 book <i>Animacies</i>, Mel Chen argues, “Language is as much alive as it is dead, and it is certainly material. . . . It is a corporeal, sensual embodied act. It is, by definition, animated.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en443" id="en443r">13</a> As both her book and Kac’s transgenic art suggest, the recognition of this fact and the process of unpacking its implications for the ways we conceptualize relationality between one another and the world in and through language will likely drive developments across a range of fields in coming years.</p>

    <p>Throughout this book, I have worked to develop a Deaf epistemology that helps to highlight examples of writers, artists, and theorists thinking through similar complexities. Whether by modeling an ethics of relationality through embodied impersonality, the noncontradictory ways discourses can move simultaneously toward the past and the future, interpretive strategies for navigating indeterminacy that engage the body, or analyses of the visual image that invite us to register the movement and temporal expansion embedded within, Deaf epistemology provides a range of interpretive possibilities for engaging modernism that also gesture outward, offering surprising insight into conversations, including those surrounding contemporary genetic art, in which modernist studies has a great deal to contribute. By expanding the contexts in which we consider all of these fields, it is my hope that <i>Deafening Modernism</i> has revealed some of the approaches that analysis of the significances and possibilities of embodied language might take in the coming years.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
