<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="ch02">
    <h1 class="ct"><a class="page" id="p35"></a><a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">1. Impersonality: Tradition and the Inescapable Body</a></h1>

    <div class="epigraph">
      <p class="ep">A song, a spirit, a white star that moves across the heavens to mark the end of a world epoch or a presage to some coming glory. Yet she is embodied terribly a human being, a woman, a personality as the most impersonal become when they confront their fellow beings.</p>

      <p class="ept">—<span style="font-style: normal;">H.D.,</span> <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pf">In <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i>, H.D. describes the Greek poet Sapho in terms that signal some of the preeminent tensions between impersonality, personality, and the embodied subject that emerge in both modernist writing and the scholarly tradition that has developed to analyze it. The writer here is specifically, terribly, embodied, but the boundaries of that body are porous, enabling her to be simultaneously “a song, a spirit, a white star”—an aesthetic creation, a source of inspiration, and an element of the environment. In the moment in which she encounters the other, however, impersonality transforms into personality, an embodied subjectivity, even as something of that impersonality lingers in the unexpected syntax of the description’s final line and the pronoun’s insistence on generality rather than specificity; “they” rather than “she.” The poet is presented as impersonal—diffuse, porous, interpenetrated by the world around her—but simultaneously “a human being, a woman, a personality.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en103" id="en103r">1</a></p>

    <p>The intriguingly ambiguous status of the body in H.D.’s description of poetic impersonality highlights the challenge that corporeality poses to the more canonical versions from which it is largely excluded and highlights the body’s status as a potentially mediating force between the two, not merely a synonym of “personality” but an epistemic structure that illuminates both. Its frequent elision from the discourse represents a doubly missed opportunity, one that appears all the more striking given the hyperexposure of authorial bodies in the early twentieth century in the form of lecture tours, poetry readings, and an increasingly market-driven literary culture. Our narratives of modernism have been <a class="page" id="p36"></a>trapped between this highly personal celebrity and an apparently disembodied impersonality, the only resolution achieved by positing the latter as an elitist reaction against the former in a recapitulation of a high/low-brow binary that modernist scholarship has spent recent decades deconstructing.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en104" id="en104r">2</a></p>

    <p>This is a critical impasse in which formulations of poetic relationality derived from ASL literature—where authorial personality and impersonality are structurally bound to the literal body of the artist—prove instructive. The model of embodied impersonality that I develop based on the work of the ASL poets Peter Cook, Kenny Lerner, and Debbie Rennie is also helpful in reevaluating heretofore marginalized modernist works that have been written off as out of step with the dominant models of poetic experimentation. By linking one such set of texts—Sherwood Anderson’s <i>A New Testament</i> and <i>Mid-American Chants</i>—to elements of ASL literature, this chapter recovers their experimental value and engages them as a springboard for the production of alternative and embodied modes of poetic ethics.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0201">Depersonalization</h2>

    <p class="paft">From its most influential theorization in T.&nbsp;S. Eliot’s 1921 essay “Tradition and the Individual Talent,” the modernist doctrine of impersonality has proven something of a problem, both in the deconstructive, productively challenging sense and as a foundational ambiguity in need of clarification. Both impersonality and its doppelgänger personality attempt to communicate something about the interaction between writers and texts; as Eliot puts it, “this Impersonal theory of poetry is the relation of the poem to its author.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en105" id="en105r">3</a> The essay’s structure emphasizes the centrality of this relationship; the first half addresses Eliot’s exploration of the ways that tradition should be incorporated into verse through an understanding “not of the pastness of the past but of its presence,” while the second more specifically focuses on the status of the writer.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en106" id="en106r">4</a></p>

    <p>According to Eliot, it is by recognizing this presentness of the past that the writer becomes capable of producing quality verse. The artist, that is, expresses not his or her own emotions of an event—the difference between art and the event is always absolute—nor Wordsworth’s emotions “reflected in tranquility,” but rather this complex interaction with tradition.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en107" id="en107r">5</a> As Eliot explains, “impressions and experiences which are important for the man may take no place in the poetry, and those which become important in the poetry may play quite a negligible part <a class="page" id="p37"></a>in the man, the personality. . . . [The poet has] not a ‘personality’ to express but a particular medium, which is only a medium and not a personality.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en108" id="en108r">6</a></p>

    <p>This sense of one’s literary output deriving not from oneself but from external sources was far from novel. As Homer’s invocation at the beginning of <i>The Odyssey</i>—“Sing to me of the man, Muse, the man of twists and turns driven time and again off course, once he had plundered the hallowed heights of Troy”—famously illustrates, the ancient Greeks believed in the power of entities external to writers who would speak through them in order to produce great works of art.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en109" id="en109r">7</a> Similarly, ancient Romans approached genius as something one was temporarily inhabited by rather than as a stable category of identity.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en110" id="en110r">8</a> In <i>The Poetics of Impersonality</i>, Maud Ellmann points out that this understanding of the poetic muse also characterized much of the romantic verse that Eliot specifically tried to distance himself from, especially as it reemerged in late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century discussions of automatic writing, in which spiritual guidance was said to assist writers who appeared to be unconscious.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en111" id="en111r">9</a></p>

    <p>Despite these well-established precursors, impersonality was seized on as a distinctly modernist phenomenon, said to emerge from the alienating conditions of modern life. It is outlined in Eliot’s “Tradition” in terms of the relation between writer and text; similar to the penetrative nature of the muses of geniuses, the impersonal writer became a medium, though one distinguished through the disembodied nature of the history that spoke through him or her. For Eliot, this set of relations allowed poetry to function as “an escape from emotion; it is not the expression of personality, but an escape from personality,” an escape that necessitated “a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en112" id="en112r">10</a> Of course, as Eliot cheekily notes in his conclusion, one must “have personality to want to escape from it.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en113" id="en113r">11</a> In this apparently flippant remark, Eliot points up one of the most productive paradoxes in the essay. Personality must simultaneously be present and absent; a unified authorial conscious must exert control over the materials (to ensure that tradition is dealt with in the manner Eliot deems appropriate) at the same time that it is destroyed. The relation between text and author that Eliot defines as impersonal is itself predicated on personality even as, in the words of Sharon Cameron, “representations of impersonality suspend, eclipse, and even destroy the idea of the person as such, who is not treated as a social, political, or individual entity.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en114" id="en114r">12</a> In ways that parallel H.D.’s description of Sapho more closely than may be initially <a class="page" id="p38"></a>apparent, within Eliot’s argument is a foundational ambiguity about the relationship between the personal and the impersonal that is mirrored in his decision to publish a work calling for self-extinction in a magazine titled the <i>Egoist</i>.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en115" id="en115r">13</a></p>

    <p>As a result of this ambiguity, the meaning of “impersonality” has never been as clear as might be expected given the significant role the concept played in the artistic output of the period. Ellmann questions whether impersonality “mean[s] decorum, reticence, and self-restraint? Does it imply concealment or extinction of the self? Or does it mean the poet should transcend his time and place, aspiring to universal vision?”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en116" id="en116r">14</a> In addition to Eliot’s own ambiguity, the notion of personality was further complicated through a series of diverse incarnations, including Ezra Pound’s masks and personae, Gertrude Stein’s impersonal autobiographies <i>The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas</i> and <i>Everybody’s Autobiography</i>, and W.&nbsp;B. Yeats’s automatic script, all of which are often described under the same heading.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en117" id="en117r">15</a> The slippage in definitions between these ideas and the fact that many of the questions Ellmann poses could be asked of Eliot’s notion of impersonality or personality suggests a deconstruction that leads Ellmann to conclude, “the terms ‘impersonal’ and ‘personal’ have probably outlived their usefulness.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en118" id="en118r">16</a></p>

    <p>And yet it is in part because of the complex interplay between personality and impersonality that the latter has remained a productive touchstone for interrogating the links between modernist authority and authorship. According to Rochelle Rives, Eliot</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqs">allows us to see more clearly how impersonality might both decenter and build authority. On the one hand, . . . modernist impersonality supports distanced and strange intimacies, wherein subjects and objects demonstrate their attachment to each other while preserving specific boundaries. . . . Authority, on the other hand, can be seen as an overt structure of invasion, a spatial situation that impersonality can also sustain, occurring precisely through the forms of interior “access” that enable impersonal connection.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en119" id="en119r">17</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">If personality and impersonality are not mutually exclusive, then neither are their implications for political engagement. Indeed, it is precisely because of the ways impersonality can be both mapped onto authoritarian notions of hermeneutic control and simultaneously open to radical fragmentation that it has remained a dominant part of the discourse, particularly in a post- (or post-post-) structuralist landscape that celebrates such problematics. Impersonality is at its most critically <a class="page" id="p39"></a>valuable precisely where it dismantles rather than “preserv[es] specific boundaries,” boundaries between modes of discourse as well as corporeal subjects.</p>

    <p>These tensions have also enabled impersonality to inform later twentieth-century theories, especially those positing the death of the author and the movement away from discussing individual authors and toward author functions. Both formulations push the corporeal subject even further from the aesthetic work in ways that have been critiqued as disregarding the significance of writers as subjects in the world.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en120" id="en120r">18</a> In “The Death of the Author,” Roland Barthes justifies this separation by arguing that authors exert tyrannical control over the meanings of their works. The death of the author, he writes, enables the dismantling of “the Author’s empire”: “Once the Author is gone, the claim to ‘decipher’ a text becomes quite useless. To give an Author to a text is to impose upon that text a stop clause, to furnish it with a final significance, to close the writing.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en121" id="en121r">19</a> It is on the grounds of a similar relation between authors and authority that Michel Foucault describes the question of authorial identity or dis-identity as “one of the fundamental ethical principles of contemporary writing.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en122" id="en122r">20</a> Authorial presence need not limit interpretive freedom in these ways. The status of the author’s relationship to the text (and, through it, to the audience) does, however, have ethical implications that more explicit analysis of embodiment calls into focus.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0202">Celebrity Personality</h2>

    <p class="paft">One of the consequences of Eliotic impersonality and the tradition that followed in its wake was a turning away from associations between corporeal writing subjects and authors. Eliot’s prominence within the academy and the significance of these formulations in particular to the development of New Criticism—an approach to literary analysis that privileged the text itself as arbiter of meaning, rather than authorial, historical, or cultural context—contributed to the ascendance of impersonality as a specifically anticorporeal project. As I indicated earlier, part of the narrative of impersonality’s popularity situates it as a response against developments in early twentieth-century media culture that were more clearly aligned with bodily discourse.</p>

    <p>For a long time, authorial personhood was separated off from accounts of impersonality, which was located firmly in the “high” modernist camp of the culture wars. As the high/low divide has receded, however, the widespread relevance of bodies—and, specifically, of writers <a class="page" id="p40"></a>as embodied subjects—has reemerged as a site of critical attention. This interest is evidenced in the recent explosion of scholarly works on modernist celebrity culture. Loren Glass’s <i>Authors Inc.: Literary Celebrity in the United States, 1880–1980</i> (2004), Aaron Jaffe’s <i>Modernism and the Culture of Celebrity</i> (2005), Faye Hammill’s <i>Women, Celebrity, and Literary Culture between the Wars</i> (2010), Jonathan Goldman’s <i>Modernism Is the Literature of Celebrity</i> (2011), Melissa Bradshaw’s <i>Amy Lowell: Diva Poet</i> (2011), and Karen Leick’s <i>Gertrude Stein and the Making of an American Celebrity</i> (2009) all attest to the difficulty of (and waning investment in) separating the bodies of early twentieth-century writers from their works.</p>

    <p>As these studies demonstrate, fascination with the relation between bodies, texts, and culture was always a part of early twentieth-century discourse when the bodies of writers were, if anything, overexposed as developments in new media technology contributed to unprecedented levels of and possibilities for visibility. An explosion in print markets meant that writers had the ability to reach ever-expanding (and increasingly literate) audiences and that readers often came to books with prior knowledge of the individuals who wrote them. Standardized news stories, as well as the development of printing methods that enabled speed and the reproduction of visual images, increased newspaper and magazine sales, meaning that more and more Americans had access to the same stories. Both magazines and books also became less expensive to produce. Along with a rapid rise in national literacy rates, this increased production contributed to the emergence of a mass pulp-fiction market that engaged in an ongoing dialogue with the cultivated specialty markets of the supposed literary elites.</p>

    <p>Despite resistance from some quarters, the rise of what Timothy Galow terms a “national celebrity culture” also impacted the ways writers interacted with readers.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en123" id="en123r">21</a> One indicator of the extent to which audiences were increasingly fascinated with not only the works but the lives of authors can be found in the number of authorial autobiographies, which increased by 400 percent between 1880 and 1920.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en124" id="en124r">22</a> The circulation of this information meant that the experience of reading literary texts was increasingly being shaped by what readers knew (or thought they knew) about authorial subjects. Both in response to and against this trend (as an attempt to keep the focus on their ideas), authors set off on lecture and reading tours that were hugely popular.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en125" id="en125r">23</a> As Melissa Bradshaw explains, the early twentieth century was “a vibrant moment in American popular culture when poetry enjoyed mainstream popularity, <a class="page" id="p41"></a>audiences packed poetry readings, and readers avidly followed the honors, exploits and feuds of their favorite poets in the literary columns of daily newspapers.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en126" id="en126r">24</a> Writers had become celebrities. Literary celebrity was not entirely new; Oscar Wilde and Charles Dickens, to go back two successive generations, had both been incredibly successful touring America and establishing themselves as well-known public figures as well as writers. But with the dawn of the twentieth century, the development of a vocabulary of international celebrity in the film industry, and the increased ease of travel and general economic prosperity that enabled individuals both to attend lectures and to purchase books for pleasure, such tours ceased to be charming oddities and rapidly turned into the status quo, what authors needed to do, either to sell their work in the first place or to attempt to retain some measure of control over the ways in which they and their work were discussed.</p>

    <p>The reaction to Gertrude Stein’s famous tour of America, undertaken after the successful publication of <i>The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas</i>, illustrates the extent to which this circulation impacted the ways modernist writers were read. Galow describes the perception of Stein as a “bold and mysterious woman who had long been a topic of conversation in the American press, gaining such nicknames as the Mama of Dada, Mother Goose of Montparnasse, the high priestess of the Left Bank, the Mother of Modernism, and the queen bee of the expatriate hive, [who] had managed to generate a significant amount of interest in her persona without drawing audiences to her ideas.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en127" id="en127r">25</a> As the passage emphasizes, Stein emerged from the tour a figure of fetishized interest, increasingly detached from the nominal source of her fame. Audiences who lined up in their hundreds and even thousands to watch Stein speak, to interact with her as an embodied subject, often had very little interest in her work. “Mother Goose of Montparnasse, the high priestess of the Left Bank” and “the queen bee of the expatriate hive” all reference details of Stein’s personal life (where she lived) rather than how she wrote. And both “Mama of Dada” and “the Mother of Modernism” take more interest in gender (and in alliterative play) than in reflecting actual knowledge of Stein’s art.</p>

    <p>Far from extinguishing the personality of the work’s creator, that is, public performances trafficked in the audience’s desire to read a connection. The meaning of the works for those who were present became inexorably tied up in their ideas about the body present onstage. That audiences were only too willing to conflate poetic with authorial speakers is dramatically illustrated by the account of Amy Lowell’s first public <a class="page" id="p42"></a>reading in 1915. Like Stein, Lowell eventually became incredibly popular as a reader and lecturer, but at this first reading, she was met with fierce audience hostility. As Bradshaw recounts in <i>Amy Lowell: Diva Poet</i>, Lowell began with the poem “Spring Day,” the first section of which, “Bath,” reads as follows:</p>

    <div class="blockquote">
      <p class="bqf">The day is fresh-washed and fair, and there is a smell of tulips and narcissus in the air.</p>

      <p class="bq">The sunshine pours in at the bath-room window and bores through the water in the bath-tub in lathes and planes of greenish-white. It cleaves the water into flaws like a jewel, and cracks it to bright light.</p>

      <p class="bq">Little spots of sunshine lie on the surface of the water and dance, dance, and their reflections wobble deliciously over the ceiling; a stir of my finger sets them whirring, reeling. I move a foot, and the planes of light in the water jar. I lie back and laugh, and let the green-white water, the sun-flawed beryl water, flow over me. The day is almost too bright to bear, the green water covers me from the too bright day. I will lie here awhile and play with the water and the sun spots.</p>

      <p class="bql">The sky is blue and high. A crow flaps by the window, and there is a whiff of tulips and narcissus in the air. <a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en128" id="en128r">26</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Despite the sensual imagery—luxurious scents of narcissus and tulips, the fingers moving in the water, the playful suggestion of cleaving—the textual body in Lowell’s poem is never actually placed on display. Covered by the water, its most suggestive qualities are displaced onto the inanimate: it is the day that is “fresh-washed and fair,” the light’s reflections that “wobble deliciously over the ceiling.” Just as the water in the tub conceals the body in the text, so too do the poem’s words, offering glimpses only of fingers and toes, rather than more intimate bodily parts.</p>

    <p>The audience, however, could see nothing but the body, as though it were the poem and not the light “bor[ing] through the water,” revealing what they felt should be kept hidden. They erupted, disconcerted not with the body of the woman in the poem but with the association they drew to Lowell’s own. Listeners were unable to separate the poem’s poetic voice from the woman they saw reading, to identify it as anything other than a confessional account of a sensual experience in which they apparently had no desire to fit the nonconformant body of Lowell, who was derided throughout her life for being overweight.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en129" id="en129r">27</a> Reproducing this sentiment, the critic Margaret Widdemer later argued that Lowell “was <a class="page" id="p43"></a>going too far in her implicit demand that her personality be forgotten. It was inexcusable; it was rude.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en130" id="en130r">28</a> Significantly in Widdemer’s comments, personality becomes synonymous with the body; Lowell’s reading is “rude” because it is perceived to be a description of the poet’s own physical experience that violated proprietary norms. Despite taking place at the American Poetry Society, a venue in which one would have assumed audiences were accustomed to distinguishing between the poetic and personal “I,” modes of engaging poetry had become so circumscribed by ideas of embodiment that they could not separate Lowell’s poetic speaker from the physical presence of the woman speaking before them onstage.</p>

    <p>However much the theory of poetic impersonality attempted to drive a wedge between authors and texts, that is, even during the years when this kind of poetry was most in vogue, the public’s instinct was to do precisely the opposite. This was true even in the case of Eliot himself, the perception of whose work, especially his most famous poem <i>The Waste Land,</i> was very much shaped by ideas about the writer as a personality. As Lawrence Rainey explains in his history of the poem’s publication, <i>The Waste Land</i> was publicized as a modernist masterpiece by the impresario Ezra Pound long before it appeared. Early reviews, however, suggest that not everyone was immediately won over. The poem was challenging, frustrating, fragmented. It often appeared difficult for the sake of being difficult, unnecessarily elitist. Assessing the poem, Conrad Aiken glumly noted, “there is a distinct weakness consequent on the use of allusions which may have both intellectual and emotional value for Mr. Eliot, but (even with the notes) none for us.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en131" id="en131r">29</a> <i>Time</i> magazine wryly noted that the poem’s “only obvious fault is that no one can understand it,” and Charles Powell memorably referred to it as “so much waste paper.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en132" id="en132r">30</a> Despite these unpromising readings, however, the poem went on to define a generation of writers. Even those such as Hart Crane who disliked it felt they could not ignore it.</p>

    <p>One clue as to how <i>The Waste Land</i> could achieve this status despite the inability of many readers to make any sense of it can be gleaned in Malcolm Cowley’s observation, in an article published in 1934, that “no other American poet had so many disciples as Eliot.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en133" id="en133r">31</a> Eliot’s authorial personality—cultivated in large part through the publicity machine that was Ezra Pound—as a difficult but brilliant and, moreover, <i>important</i> writer made both casual readers and critics engage with the work in ways they likely would not have bothered had the text been published anonymously. As Edmund Wilson, the future managing editor of <i>Vanity Fair</i> who came to be a supporter of the work, put it, “I found the poem <a class="page" id="p44"></a>disappointing on first reading but after a third shot I think it up to his usual.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en134" id="en134r">32</a> The poem itself, that is, was not valued by everyone according to internal (or impersonal) merits. It was only through its relationship to Eliot, to “his usual,” that readers such as Wilson came to view the work as significant. Had the poem not been by Eliot (the author, the personality, the embodied figure circulating in society), Wilson and others may well not have given it a second or third reading at all.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0203">Signed Personality</h2>

    <p class="paft">For better or worse, modernist texts were becoming increasingly entangled with ideas about the bodies of their authors. The difficulty of separating artist from text was so widespread a concern that it became the subject matter of many works, perhaps most famously the final stanza of W.&nbsp;B. Yeats’s 1928 “Among School Children”:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">Labour is blossoming or dancing where</p>

      <p class="sl">The body is not bruised to pleasure soul.</p>

      <p class="sl">Nor beauty born out of its own despair,</p>

      <p class="sl">Nor blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.</p>

      <p class="sl">O chestnut-tree, great-rooted blossomer,</p>

      <p class="sl">Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?</p>

      <p class="sl">O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,</p>

      <p class="sll">How can we know the dancer from the dance?<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en135" id="en135r">33</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">The poem is an extended meditation on ontology; visiting an elementary school, the speaker uses the disconnect between the pupils’ perception of him as “a sixty-year old smiling public man” and his own thoughts on his love when she was a child to question which version of himself—if any—is authentic.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en136" id="en136r">34</a></p>

    <p>Recognizing the multitude of identities emerging from perception, memory, and performance, the enactment of subjectivity itself must be performative, its own kind of art. And in a system in which there is no stable “dancer,” in which the dancer only comes into being as such through the dance, the two can never be separated out. This question of artistic identity has been central to the development of Deaf theory and, more specifically, to the development of Deaf literary analysis. As ASL literature reveals, the human-body-as-art (and specifically literature) does indeed have critical consequences for how manual cultures think of both and how they create and preserve cultural memory.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en137" id="en137r">35</a> It is precisely the inseparability of body from art that makes ASL texts useful sites of <a class="page" id="p45"></a>analysis for modernist theories of impersonality, particularly as they articulate themselves in relationship to personality and embodiment.</p>

    <p>For manual literary traditions, the elision of the body that appears as a foundational principle of formalism is a structural impossibility. In sign language poems, the poet’s “personality” is always already visible, is itself both the medium and a large part of the content of the work. Developing a better understanding of the relationship between authorship and bodies through recourse to ASL literature can aid our understanding of the relationship between celebrity and impersonality. In turn, the expansive body of criticism that has developed around these issues in literary studies over the past hundred years can help us recognize the implications and ethical possibilities of sign literature.</p>

    <p>One of the most striking differences between signed and written texts is a literalization (and embodiment) of the problematic raised by Yeats. As Heidi M. Rose explains, in ASL, “the poem literally lives in the poet, and the poet gives the poem life through performance.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en138" id="en138r">36</a> The metaphoric distance between bodies and words present in all written texts (even those that thematically foreground the body) collapses. In sign languages, the content of the message is inseparable from the body of the signer. To receive information, one must visually engage that body, a body that conveys grammatical information through the arms, torso, and eyes as well as the hands. It is a body that also cannot help but communicate certain extralinguistic information about the signer him- or herself, including (potentially) age, race, height, ability, and (depending on the fluency and style of his or her sign) educational background.</p>

    <p>It should be noted that not all engagements with signed languages are visual. Signing DeafBlind individuals communicate using Tactile ASL, placing their hands over those of a signer in order to read tactilely what sighted deaf people would perceive visually (or hearing people aurally). Because of the ways it reroutes grammatical elements that sighted ASL users express through the face, Tactile ASL, though very similar, is not identical to visual ASL.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en139" id="en139r">37</a> The majority of deaf people are only able to understand ASL when it is perceived visually, and they overwhelmingly tend to describe both their language and culture as visual.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en140" id="en140r">38</a></p>

    <p>Despite the differences, like ASL, Tactile ASL insists on the recognition of a human signifying subject before semantic messages can be received; to perceive the message’s content, one must be in physical contact with the other.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en141" id="en141r">39</a> This basic reality of manual communication has interesting repercussions, one of which is its problematization of any concept of the death of the author or even the author as function. It also <a class="page" id="p46"></a>provides new insights into the later twentieth- and twenty-first-century impasse between identity politics and deconstruction, reflected in disability aesthetics in the tension between the political import of foregrounding “the actual bodies and mental conditions of . . . authors” and a postmodern sensibility that seeks to distance us from the perceived tyranny of biology (or biography).<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en142" id="en142r">40</a></p>

    <p>One particularly illustrative work in this regard is “Poetry” by the Flying Words Project, a poetic team comprising Peter Cook and Kenny Lerner that, like Conley’s “Salt,” works at the intersection of languages and cultures in order to demonstrate the unique significatory capabilities of ASL. “Poetry” begins with Cook repeatedly and rhythmically signing the word Poetry (or, more precisely, ASL Poetry which is distinct from the musically focused sign for nonmanual verse).<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en143" id="en143r">41</a> The sign ASL Poetry is etymologically linked to the signs for “expression” and “inspire” and moves outward from the chest—an offering up of the body, poetry as the expression of the self. The poem goes on to interrogate this link between the embodied production of the words and their semantic meaning through language play designed to highlight the way in which the words (like the sign ASL Poetry) emerge from and encircle Cook’s body.</p>

    <p>In the section most pertinent to our discussion, the poem’s narrator paints a picture, the signs for both the canvas and the brush emerging organically from the repeated sign Poetry. Here the narrator—Cook—becomes both painter and painting. Role shifting, a key feature of ASL grammar, enables him both to spread the paint on the canvas and then to embody the image created by that spread paint, to become the work of art within the work of art.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en144" id="en144r">42</a> Cook depicts the impact that the brush strokes have on the face being painted, and the interaction between the painting and the artist quickly becomes a struggle for control of the appearance of the art, for its meaning. There is a manic violence in the way the painter slaps and slashes the canvas, emphasized by the painting’s grotesque expressions. These expressions allow the canvas to fight back against the painter’s authorial control by comically rupturing both the painting and the poem.</p>

    <p>Increasingly frustrated by his inability to gain control over his creation, the painter finally snatches the canvas and crunches it down into nothingness as the face struggles against compression before being destroyed and thrown away. In one way, the artist has asserted mastery; the troublesome painting is gone. In the process, however, he has had to destroy his art, thereby deconstructing his own identity as an artist. In this sense, the painting (which created poetic amusement for the <a class="page" id="p47"></a>audience) becomes more of an artist than the painter. The painter is also bested on the level of the poem. It is the painting with its irreverent comedy and surprisingly poignant struggle against oblivion that has the greatest impact. On multiple levels, the portrait the poem presents is that of the artist who is no longer an artist, the destruction of the division between artistic producer and object. The poem dramatizes the death of its author.</p>

    <p>Even more instructive for our purposes is the way in which the thematic treatment of these ideas is mirrored in the structure of the poem. Cook, the author/artist, is the painter and the painting, as well as the poem’s narrative voice. “Poetry” provides an ongoing metacommentary on Cook’s relationship to his materials. And Cook-the-poet is anything but dead; at poem’s end, he remains before us an undeniably living, breathing presence. “Poetry” is about nothing as much as the body, a demonstration of its ability to move through space, to make present various characters. In the absence of the body, there is no poem—and not just any body but Cook’s in particular. Heidi M. Rose describes the significance of the artist’s idiosyncrasies in the context of signed languages: “The performance nuances do far more than reveal an artist’s individual style; they are integrally related to the <i>meanings</i> of the poem or narrative. It is these nuances, not the manual signs or non-manual grammatical markers alone, that give each poem its distinct identity because they are bound up in the <i>body</i> of the artist.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en145" id="en145r">43</a> “Poetry” is what it is because of the fact that it is Cook’s body performing it. In the hands of another poet, no matter how closely he or she attempted to mimic Cook’s movements and expressions, it would be a different poem.</p>

    <p>And yet Cook as omnipresent authorial figure does not exert tyrannical control over the text. “Poetry” has nothing to do with Cook as a biographical subject. Nor is it even necessarily an expression of Cook’s poetic voice. Anything that we might identify as a poetic voice—Cook’s perspective, his style of movement, his expressions—are taken over by the characters, by the poem itself. Here, the text speaks its author; it comes to life and takes control. The presence of Cook’s body in the poem results not in his dictation of meaning but rather in the fracture of Cook himself as a coherent subject position. Part of what “Poetry” demonstrates is the fallacy of the assumption that authorial presence equates to authorial control.</p>

    <p>To put that in terms resonant with our broader discussion, Cook’s personality is extinguished; the impersonality of the text speaking through Cook is perhaps closer to Eliot’s ideal than Eliot himself could <a class="page" id="p48"></a>have imagined. And yet we are never permitted to lose sight of the fact of Cook’s presence, his humanity. “Poetry” presents a seemingly paradoxical embodied impersonality that suggests how we might rethink the relationship between texts and bodies in such a way so as to remain responsible to diverse lived experiences while still opening up to postmodern fluidity and eschewing a version of personality (or impersonality) that would align it with absolute authorial control.</p>

    <p>While the idea of poetic impersonality and authorial presence may seem fundamental contradictions, ASL poetry illustrates the ways in which embodied impersonality is not only a theoretical but an actual solution to the impasse. What is more, this embodied impersonality is ethically suggestive in ways that prove instructive in our rereadings of both canonical and marginalized modernist texts. ASL literature fundamentally problematizes the separation between authorial body and text (one cannot point to “Poetry” as an aesthetic object distinct from Cook’s body).<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en146" id="en146r">44</a> “Poetry” offers an alternative variety of impersonality, one based on a literal interpenetration of authorial and textual bodies.</p>

    <p>As analysis of public poetry readings reveals, the relationship between bodies and texts was a critical question for readers and authors at the beginning of the twentieth century. As I demonstrate in the next section, the implications of such blurring usefully illuminate the engagement with these issues within written modernist texts. The emphasis on an Eliotic conception of impersonality—one that, as I have shown, the reception of his own work complicates—has prevented us from fully exploring some of the other models of impersonality developed at the same time, particularly those that, like the embodied impersonality of the Flying Words Project, highlight the significance of corporality.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0204">Interdependency</h2>

    <p class="paft">In the poetry of Sherwood Anderson, we can observe an attempt to think through such embodiment in the context of print culture’s steady movement away from the embodied roots of literature. Unlike Eliot, whose interpretation of “tradition” primarily emphasized a written literary tradition, Anderson remained much more interested in models of literature developed in more ancient storytelling cultures. In these societies, cultural knowledge was preserved and transmitted through living bodies, and literature served a decidedly social function. Drawing on this history enabled Anderson to incorporate ideas about embodiment into his own conceptions of authorship and texts in his two volumes <a class="page" id="p49"></a>of poetry, <i>Mid-American Chants</i> (1918) and <i>A New Testament</i> (1927), to refasten bodies back onto texts from which print culture had removed them.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en147" id="en147r">45</a> Because of his sustained engagement with the social function of literature and his attempt to produce written literature that remained responsible to people’s lived experiences, Anderson’s poetry provides an intriguing example of how the ideas of embodied impersonality and interpenetration present in ASL literature might look when translated onto the page.</p>

    <p>One way that Anderson envisions the alternative relational space opened by storytelling is as a series of interpenetrations. His poetry repeatedly returns to the image of bodies entering and merging with one another. A model of interpenetration destabilizes the concepts of self and other by problematizing any easy dividing line between them as the boundaries of the body become literally porous. Disabled bodies provide one of the most visible illustrations of these kinds of interactions, as they are the most likely to find themselves merging both metaphorically and literally with objects and other subjects through complex series of relationships with assistive aids such as prostheses, implants, catheters, and other devices, as well as through caretaking relationships in which one or more individuals provide functions for others (seeing, moving, using the bathroom, for example) that are conventionally thought of as actions only performed by the self (as in some ways constitutive of the self).</p>

    <p>As dependency theorists have argued, within a society that firmly establishes independence as the marker of personhood, interdependence or interpenetration can serve a powerfully subversive role by reminding us of the fiction of that independence. All humans exist in webs of relationships in which they assist and are assisted by others. Ignoring this reality means ignoring the ways we actually interact in the world. In <i>Love’s Labor: Essays on Women</i>, Eva Kittay explains that, “by excluding . . . dependency from social and political concerns, we have been able to fashion the pretense that we are independent—that the cooperation between persons that some insist is <i>inter</i>dependence is simply the mutual (often voluntary) cooperation between essentially independent persons.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en148" id="en148r">46</a> This process, she continues, not only marginalizes those among us who are most visibly dependent but also mischaracterizes the ways in which all people interact. In addition to physical or mental needs or preferences related to age, illness, or disability, these also include the political, social, cultural, and racial realities that bind us all together.</p>

    <p>From an ethical standpoint, the fiction of this independence establishes firm lines between ourselves and the people we encounter, which <a class="page" id="p50"></a>in turn permits us to behave disrespectfully or callously toward them. By recognizing these interconnected relationships, dependency theorists have argued, we might also begin to engage in more responsible ways toward other subjects. As Kelly Oliver states, “Our dependence . . . brings with it ethical obligations. Insofar as we <i>are</i> by virtue of our environment and by virtue of relationships with other people, we have ethical obligations rooted in the very possibility of subjectivity itself. We are obligated to respond to our environment and other people in ways that open up, rather than close off, the possibility of response.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en149" id="en149r">47</a> A greater appreciation of these intimate interconnections, this ethics of care postulates, would lead people to treat others better, even if only out of self-interest.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en150" id="en150r">48</a> While this might strike some people as naïve (or at least premature), immediate changes in behavior are not necessary for the concept of such an ethics to be useful.</p>

    <p>Adopting alternative ways of conceptualizing our relations with others has the potential to change the ways in which we behave toward them. Anderson’s writing engages the idea of interdependence and pushes it one step further into a conversation about interpenetration. One limitation of dependency theory is its a priori assumption of the presence of two (or more) discrete subjects. As disabled bodies themselves demonstrate, however, this discreteness is not necessarily the given we imagine it to be. By suggesting relationships in which the participants may no longer be fully distinguishable from one another, Anderson’s model offers an even more radical notion of the links between ourselves and others.</p>

    <p>Like “dependency,” the term “penetration” carries with it a great deal of negative baggage. The idea of being penetrated implies a vulnerability that has been linked to misogynist constructions of female sexuality and has therefore come to be seen as demeaning. “Penetration” is also haunted by the specter of violence against the self, both in the practical terms of rape or other forms of physical violence such as stabbing and more metaphysically, because during even consensual penetration, the entrance of something external into the body requires a sacrifice of the fiction of the self as a discrete entity essentially separate from other subjects and from the world around it. For Anderson, however, it is precisely the sacrifice of this fiction that becomes the starting point for ethical behavior.</p>

    <p>Within queer studies, theorists have similarly postulated this site as a location for a radical reconsideration of the relationship between self and other. As Leo Bersani explains, “The self is a practical convenience; promoted to the status of an ethical ideal, it is a sanction for violence.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en151" id="en151r">49</a> <a class="page" id="p51"></a>Doing away with this fictional self has the potential to lessen the violence, enacted against disabled bodies that are excluded from personhood through reference to fictional autonomy. However jolting the notion of the discrete self as fiction might be, the porous nature of the body is a scientific reality as well as a social ideal; the skin that appears to separate us from the world around us is made up mostly of empty space. It is only because our senses are not precise enough to register this reality that we maintain the belief that our bodies are closed off. In abandoning this fiction by “shattering . . . the psychic structures themselves,” we open a space to consider alternative relationalities not based on this mythical construction of the self.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en152" id="en152r">50</a></p>

    <p>As Michel Foucault argues in a now famous description of social interactions, the development of “new relational possibilities” or “way[s] of life . . . can yield intense relations, . . . a culture and an ethics.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en153" id="en153r">51</a> Thinking about the potential for interaction, in other words, is not merely an academic exercise. Pondering this possibility, Bersani registers both the potential of the idea and, like Anderson decades earlier, the dangers of linking these new relations to static notions of coherent and discrete subjects. As he notes, “Our thinking about new ways of being together has been predominantly reactive, against established relational modes,” and has not “led to a questioning of the prioritizing of difference itself as a foundational relational structure.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en154" id="en154r">52</a> Both Bersani and Foucault are thinking specifically of homosexual relationality, but their ideas have implications for how we think about the ways any two (or more) individuals interact, particularly the ways these interactions can occur through language and literature. The stakes of such interactions are potentially quite high. As Luce Irigaray suggests, developing new ways of being with others is the necessary next step in contemporary ethics: “A culture of being with the other is still to be worked out. This is a task for our time, not only an intellectual luxury or an apolitical stake, not even a moral or religious duty. To learn how to be with the other is a new stage, and perhaps the most important step, toward our becoming humans.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en155" id="en155r">53</a> By situating these issues within the context of literature, ASL poetics respond to the push that Irigaray identifies to move them away from religion and morality and toward cultural and aesthetic practices.</p>

    <p>What is so intriguing about the ways Anderson depicts relationality is that he forces a reconsideration of Bersani’s difference in precisely these spheres. The bodily relationship that Anderson aligns with the kind of poetics he perceives as more socially responsible involves a willingness to be radically open, to do away with the boundaries of one’s body in <a class="page" id="p52"></a>order to connect both with other people and with the environment. In “A Poet,” Anderson explicitly lays out the links between such relationality and his poetic practice:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">If I could be brave enough and</p>

      <p class="sl">live long enough I could crawl inside</p>

      <p class="sl">the life of every man, woman and child</p>

      <p class="sl">in America. After I had gone within them</p>

      <p class="sl">I could be born out of them. I could</p>

      <p class="sl">become something the like of which has</p>

      <p class="sl">never been seen before. We would see</p>

      <p class="sll">then what America is like.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en156" id="en156r">54</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Achieving artistic instinct, seeing “what America is like,” is here dependent on a distinctly interpenetrative act, with the speaker crawling inside the subjects of his work, being “born out of them” in a process that emphasizes physical difficulty and the need for bravery. The poetic ideal posited involves abandoning the boundaries of his body and merging with those of his poetic subjects, coming to know them by becoming them.</p>

    <p>In line with theories of an ethics of care, Anderson postulates that once individuals recognize their interdependence, they will have a greater sense of responsibility for and to the others around them. This responsibility is evidenced in his descriptions of encountering potential poetic subjects on the streets of Manhattan in his poem of the same name and feeling intensely guilty that he is unable to tell all of their stories. No longer just random people on a street, the people whom the speaker encounters are transformed into individuals to whom he has specific responsibilities: “To me there came men whose hands were withered. My&nbsp;/ soldiers were small and their eyes were sunken. In them&nbsp;/ was the pain that sobs, the great pain that sobs.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en157" id="en157r">55</a> The storytelling process becomes a space where these soldiers can ameliorate their pain by entering into a relationship with the storyteller. The characters in the poem become him; the poem describes the poetic process as one in which “the men&nbsp;/ who are old have entered into me.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en158" id="en158r">56</a> In contrast to the Cartesian split of intellectual and physical matters, “Manhattan” suggests that it is precisely through this embodied interpenetration that “understanding came in to me.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en159" id="en159r">57</a></p>

    <p>Interpenetration is also a central theme in “Song of Theodore,” a name that derives from the Greek for “gift of god,” which resonates in the Christian tradition with the notion of the sacrifice of one’s physical <a class="page" id="p53"></a>body for one’s people. Here, the poet enters the presence of his subject as a “lover”:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">I would touch you with the fingers of my hands. In my</p>

      <p class="sl">eyes a fire burns. The strength of my imaginings is beyond</p>

      <p class="sl">words to record. I see the loveliness in you that is hidden</p>

      <p class="sl">away. I take something from you. See, I embrace you I take</p>

      <p class="sll">you in my arms and I run away.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en160" id="en160r">58</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">It is through this intense physicality that the speaker (touching, embracing, eyes burning) is able to access what has been hidden away and to transfer it to himself. The poet enters the body of the other but is simultaneously penetrated by the stories he then takes away to record.</p>

    <p>Afraid of the intimacy of this process, of proving inadequate, the poet imagines withdrawing from the world, going into nature and solitude and making his body powerful. These musings last only two short stanzas, however, before he finds himself back in the city possessed by the presence of the people. Challenging the idea of his work as old-fashioned, Anderson’s conception of poetry here is not of romantic escape to nature but is located in the bustle of the modern city. It is only there, and not when secluded from the masses, that the words come, that the poet gains a sense of purity and gender identity: “Here in these words / I am become a man.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en161" id="en161r">59</a> The physicality of masculinity and sex, of intense embodiment, is not contrasted with aesthetic or intellectual pursuits but aligned with them. The poem’s final stanza ties the process specifically to hands:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">What cunning fingers I have. They make intricate designs.</p>

      <p class="sl">On the white paper. My cunning fingers are of the flesh.</p>

      <p class="sl">They are like me and I would make love always—to all</p>

      <p class="sl">People—men and women—here—in Chicago—in America</p>

      <p class="sll">—everywhere—always—forever—while my life lasts<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en162" id="en162r">60</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">It is the fingers “of the flesh” that will both partake of the bodily exchange and then engage in a mediated version of that exchange through the paper on which they record the knowledge they have obtained.</p>

    <p>Similar language is employed in “The Healer,” in which the speaker asserts,</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">My body does not belong to me.</p>

      <p class="sl">My body belongs to tired women</p>

      <p class="sl">who have found no lovers.</p>

      <p class="sl">It belongs to half men and half women</p>

      <p class="sll"><a class="page" id="p54"></a>My body belongs to those who lust and those who shrink from lusting.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en163" id="en163r">61</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">These links are also extended to the natural world, to “the roots of trees” and “a cunning wind,” a connection Anderson elaborates on in “Song for Lonely Roads,” in which this already multiply penetrated speaker further opens himself to the environment.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en164" id="en164r">62</a> In contrast to Ezra Pound’s command that modernist verse should “make it new,” the poem is infused with a sense of the circularity of artistic production—“The tale is old, / It has been told / By many men in many lands”—that ends with the poet including the natural world in this process of artistic creation:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">The singer dies,</p>

      <p class="sl">The singer lives,</p>

      <p class="sl">The gods wait in the corn,</p>

      <p class="sll">The soul of song is in the land.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en165" id="en165r">63</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Like Whitman’s <i>Leaves of Grass</i>, reminding the reader of the fiction of the body as fixed and stable, Anderson finds poetic inspiration in the interdependencies of bodies, words and world.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en166" id="en166r">64</a> In both “Song of Theodore” and “The Healer,” he describes a process of reconnecting literature with the organic in an ecological ethics that extends the link between writer and text outward as a way of redressing the damage that modern technology has done to words, language, and culture.</p>

    <p>The absorption of the body of the poet in the voices of the poem in “Poetry” is presented as a simultaneously violent and ecstatic annihilation of the individual artist, who is both entirely necessary and peripheral to the art. As in “Song for Lonely Roads,” the kind of radical openness that Anderson envisions renders the discrete artist almost beside the point; the song continues whether or not he lives or dies. In Anderson’s poems, the figure of the poet appears as a being that sacrifices itself by offering up its body as a conduit for cultural transmission. Rather than abandoning the individual self in a move toward complete impersonality, however, Anderson repeatedly returns to the consequences for the body of such a process, presenting it as physically painful and degrading. In “The Cornfields,” for example, the speaker/poet explains, “On my knees I crawled before my people. I debased myself. // The excretions of their bodies I took for my food. Into the / ground I went and my body died.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en167" id="en167r">65</a> Similarly, in “Manhattan,” the speaker describes the agony and then the vitality taken from “the men / who are old [and] have entered into me.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en168" id="en168r">66</a> What emerges is an ethic of poetic impersonality, in which <a class="page" id="p55"></a>to be a poet is to extinguish personality as Eliot suggested but also to foreground the imagined consequences for particular bodies.</p>

    <p>In “Word Factories,” Anderson explores the implications of reversing his association between words and bodies. In “The Healer,” people become words as they enter the poet. Here, by contrast, the act of interpenetration renders the words as people. Like “Lonely Roads,” the poem begins by invoking ancient storytelling traditions: “Long ago an old man sat on a log.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en169" id="en169r">67</a> The conceit of the poem is that “words are / living, breathing things” that need care because they have been damaged by the industrialization of the printing process: “They are the children of men that have been put to / work in a factory. Their little bodies / have become bent and stooped and twisted”—not only embodied, that is, but embodied in decidedly nonnormative ways.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en170" id="en170r">68</a></p>

    <p>To care for the words—to preserve the stories—the speaker (having been taught by the old man at the beginning of the poem) implores the reader, “Will you give a word nourishing food, carry him for a day in the warm / body of yourself, as a maid carries with due modesty a babe in her belly.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en171" id="en171r">69</a> The emphasis throughout the poem is on the visceral discomfort of this process: “There is a tough gnarled new word / that has lived for a long time in a corner / of my brain. He has set up an insanity / there. Sometimes for days I do not dare / go near the corner of myself where the / word sits crouched, ready to strike, to / spring.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en172" id="en172r">70</a> With the speaker’s head inhabited by words that are neither wholly external nor internal to him, he forfeits his existence as a discrete being.</p>

    <p>Across these poems, the artistic process is presented in terms of interpenetration; the words do not exist separately from the poet, nor the poet from the words. For Anderson, this dynamic was key to the way in which storytelling societies had transferred information through the generations and was something he was keen to approximate (and revive) in written work. In emphasizing the artist as embodied personality, however, Anderson was far from reinscribing him as a domineering presence. As he demonstrates again in “The Healer,” and like Cook in “Poetry,” Anderson’s poetic speaker is repeatedly fractured by the creative process:</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slf">My body does not belong to me.</p>

      <p class="sl">My body belongs to tired women who have found no lovers.</p>

      <p class="sl">It belongs to half men and half women.</p>

      <p class="sl">My body belongs to those who lust and those who shrink from lusting.</p>

      <p class="sl"><a class="page" id="p56"></a>It shall be consumed with fire on a far horizon.</p>

      <p class="sll">The smoke that arises form my burning body shall make the western skies golden.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en173" id="en173r">71</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Again, the writer is imagined to exist in interpenetrative relationships. Not only does he enter these specifically marginalized subjects (“tired women who have found no lovers,” “half men and half women,” “those who lust and those who shrink from lusting”); they consume him, taking over his body. This porous site of relationality is similarly able to be open to the environment, extending the interrelations surrounding the artwork outward so that the smoke of the writer’s body consumed by nature reemerges as aesthetic creation, rendering the “western skies golden.” In Anderson’s poems, this is the end point of the ethical responsibility that Emmanuel Levinas locates in the face of the other, the call to an extinction that manages to remain all about the body, interpenetration that results in embodied impersonality.</p>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ah0205">Impersonal Ethics</h2>

    <p class="paft">For Anderson, bound by the written page, this new mode of literary ethical relationality remains metaphorical. ASL, as I have argued, possesses a capacity to literalize it. In addition to blurring boundaries between text and writer, and in line with Anderson’s gesture outward toward the environment, this also includes reconceptualizing the relationship between audience and artist. The fact that ASL poetry is so foundationally about the body, about the relationship between bodies—the poet, the text’s characters, the audience—means that ASL poems are unique nexus of social interaction. And because they are about particular bodies in particular moments in space and time, because (as ASL does not have a widely used written form) they utterly refuse mechanical reproduction, they have an immediacy that is entirely linked to and constitutive of the meanings of these works.</p>

    <p>Indeed, this immanence is so central to the meaning of an ASL poem that some critics have raised the question of whether a signed text, performed by an author in isolation (and not recorded) can be properly called ASL literature. It is often the interplay between audiences, authors, and texts that enables meaning. Ben Bahan, a celebrated ASL storyteller, describes how these interpersonal dynamics impact textual production: “There has to be a shared mind-set between the audience/culture and the teller to make the tale work. This reiterates the interwoven nature of the <a class="page" id="p57"></a>triad [artist/audience/text]. The way tellers conduct their work reflects their perception of the culture, and the desired outcome of their work depends on the culture’s perception of the way they conduct it.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en174" id="en174r">72</a> The complexity of this interplay is heightened by the fact that audiences often approach ASL literature from vastly different educational, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds.</p>

    <p>This overlap between audiences and authors is ethically suggestive. It means that, in addition to being aesthetic objects, works of ASL literature are also (and foundationally) sites where humans encounter other humans, where they recognize one another as human and interact through language. The social element of poetry derives from our origins as oral or storytelling peoples, and it is temporarily re-created in modernist poetry readings and lectures. There is a long philosophical tradition of attaching ethical significance to the moment of looking into the face of the other, something necessitated in ASL by the fact that several of its grammatical features are communicated specifically through the eyes.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en175" id="en175r">73</a> As I alluded to earlier, Levinas has defined “the face of the other man as being the original locus of the meaningful,” the place where humans recognize that “no one can stay in himself; the humanity of man, subjectivity, is a responsibility for others, an extreme vulnerability.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en176" id="en176r">74</a> To view an ASL poem is always already to engage in this ethical exchange with a subject that identifies itself as human through its use of language, to take on this responsibility for the other.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en177" id="en177r">75</a></p>

    <p>The implications of this interrelatedness have served a very specific role in Deaf history. Until recently, the deaf were perceived as languageless and, therefore, as subhuman. In order to counter this misperception (and to gain financial support), during the nineteenth century American educators of the deaf held public exhibitions in which deaf pupils would be put on stage to perform poetry before a hearing audience. Poetry was seen as one of the most effective ways for children to make the case for their humanity, to establish connections with potential patrons by emphasizing similarity where the audience had previously perceived only difference. As Jennifer Esmail explains, such events demonstrated “signed languages’ positive attributes, as well as the deaf students’ intellectual capacities, including their understanding of abstract concepts and ability to write in English and other languages.”<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en178" id="en178r">76</a> The spectacle of the children’s bodies proved powerful precisely because the moment of their recognition occurred through language. Thus, poetry was deliberately staged as the site for the encounter between audience members <a class="page" id="p58"></a>and pupils in which viewers were forced (sometimes for the first time) to acknowledge the full humanity of the signing subjects on stage.</p>

    <div class="senseline">
      <p class="slh">Of Being Numerous</p>

      <p class="slf">Obsessed, bewildered</p>

      <p class="slf">By the shipwreck</p>

      <p class="sl">Of the singular</p>

      <p class="slf">We have chosen the meaning</p>

      <p class="sll">Of being numerous.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en179" id="en179r">77</a></p>
    </div>

    <p class="pcon">Poetry exhibitions created an opportunity for members of the audience to rethink their understanding of the ways they related to the people surrounding them. As George Oppen suggests in his epic poem “Of Being Numerous,” this negotiation between group and individual, which we might also read in relation to authors and audiences, was central to the development of twentieth-century experience. In different ways, Anderson, Cook, and Lerner all explore how poetry opens a space in which individuals can recognize and reflect on their own interpenetrated natures and the responsibilities to others that arise from this foregrounding of shared humanity. Debbie Rennie’s “Missing Children” similarly capitalizes on the erasure of boundaries between self and other, as well as between self and text, in ASL poetry to interrogate some of the meanings we have chosen, or might choose, for being numerous.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en180" id="en180r">78</a> The poem tells the stories of a series of children—from Nicaragua, South Africa, and Ireland—who are lost to violence. The children are linked through the central image of missing-children leaflets, which both connect them to one another and function structurally to return the viewer from the locational specificity of each section to the present neutral space of the poem’s frame. The poem begins with a child handing the speaker one such picture. Rennie then shifts to occupy the perspective of the face on the leaflet, asking in the wide-eyed and innocent expression of a child, “Have you seen me?” The narrator sadly shakes her head no, and the flyer is picked up by the wind, tumbling before landing on the ground, in a movement that becomes the sign for Dead.</p>

    <p>The role shifting of the opening section allows Rennie to portray something of the physicality of each of the characters (their styles of movement, eye lines, and expressions), rather than simply describing them. In doing so, Rennie highlights the distance between herself—as an adult occupying a different national and at times ethnic and racial subject <a class="page" id="p59"></a>position—and the endangered children, while simultaneously connecting to them through the profoundly intimate act of giving them voice through her body. Similar to the characters in “Poetry,” whose voices write their author, Rennie’s poetic voice is punctured by—is inseparable from—the bodies and voices of the children she seeks to represent.</p>

    <p>The poem begins with a child handing the speaker one such picture. Using role shifting to portray all of the characters in the scene, Rennie moves between the child, the narrator, and finally the picture on the leaflet. Literature’s ethical potential has often been associated with the ways it appears to permit readers to see the world through the perspective of a distinct subjectivity (the writer’s, if not fully the characters’). Through role shifting in ASL, that perspective shift is embodied as the speaker becomes different characters through nonmanual signifiers including eye line, body language, posture, and facial expression. Rennie’s poetic voice emerges at the intersection of these perspectives as they are all conveyed through the same body.</p>

    <p>This technique drives the first section of the poem, “Nicaragua,” which tells the story of a young boy working in a coffee field with his father. In a pattern that is repeated throughout the piece, the section opens with the specific, the picture on the leaflet, before drawing back to provide broader context. Rennie begins with close-ups of the poem’s central characters planting and then zooms out to show the entire field, full of people at work. Suddenly, the trees open to reveal lines of soldiers, their frenetic movements sharply contrasting the gentle rhythms of the field workers. As the soldiers shoot their way through the field, bodies fall in their wake, conveyed with a distance shot, the bent two classifier representing upturned legs. Rennie cuts between the terrified face of the little boy and the cocky arrogance of the soldier emptying his gun into the bodies of the workers.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en181" id="en181r">79</a> In slow motion, the boy reaches up to make a peace offering, and the soldier, still smirking, discharges his weapon into the boy’s body, the section ending in an explosion of grief.</p>

    <p>The poem builds on this thematic consideration of the nature of violence, which becomes increasingly complicated and enriched by the structural interpenetration inherent in its language. In a poem so explicitly about violence, this blurring of boundaries is pointed and at times uncomfortable. In the poem’s final section, “Ireland,” Rennie uses this discomfort to thematically address the cyclical nature of violence, as well as to highlight our own participation in it. The section begins with the image of a child comically imitating the actions of his father, first mimicking his walking style and later the way he constructs and <a class="page" id="p60"></a>throws a grenade. Unlike the father’s more assured movements, the boy is clumsy, repeatedly glancing up toward his father seeking approval.<a class="enref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0013.xhtml#en182" id="en182r">80</a> The scene then cuts to a giggly girl picking flowers in a field with her father just before the grenades appear in the sky above them. The section concludes with an explosion so violent that it punctures through to the poem’s frame, sending the missing-children leaflets flying and the narrator scrambling to recollect them.</p>

    <p>Unlike in the poem’s first two sections, in which violence is perpetrated by more clearly delineated malefactors (sharp-moving soldiers with guns who laugh maniacally while decimating the villagers), this final section provides a more complex meditation on the nature of violence. No longer is it so easy to distinguish transgressors from victims, especially when, at the end of the poem, Rennie includes the grenade-throwing boy in her list of lost children.</p>

    <p>The interpenetrative structure of ASL enables Rennie to enact the idea of our shared vulnerability and culpability in acts of violence as well as to make the same point on a thematic level. Through her body, these marginalized characters gain voice. They take over Rennie’s body, speaking her, so that the images we are left with are not Rennie’s features but somehow the eyes and expressions of the children. The narrator’s—and Rennie’s—participation is itself also problematized. While Rennie’s engagement is beneficial in that it gives voice to these marginalized, forgotten children (part of whose tragedy is that they tend to die unknown, to never appear on the kinds of leaflets that frame the poem), the structure of ASL characterization means that in the boy’s copying his father’s actions, he in the final sections is actually copying Rennie. The distance collapses; there is no “father,” no comfortable separation between the different characters in the poem, between the characters and Rennie, between ourselves and the poet. We are all, the poem both suggests and demonstrates, all of them.</p>

    <p>“Missing Children” interrogates the ethics of blurring the line between author and text and, by implication, that between audience and author. More than simply describing these overlaps, the poem enacts them, <i>is</i> them. As in “Poetry” and in Anderson’s work, the body of the author is simultaneously foregrounded and exploded. Whatever we might describe as Rennie’s poetic voice is shattered by the expressions and movements of the poem’s characters. This shattering provides one answer to Foucault’s call for new relational modes by deconstructing the subject as a discrete entity and emphasizing interpenetration. “Missing Children” enacts a means of poetic self-shattering that refuses the removal of the body <a class="page" id="p61"></a>(thus avoiding the violence of ignoring authors’ human subjectivity) but also plays with the pleasure of losing the self in others. Put another way, and to return to the terminology from the beginning of the chapter, it demonstrates how embodied literature enables the simultaneous performance of both personality and impersonality.</p>

    <p>When ASL poetics is placed in the context of the fraught relationship between modernist impersonality and corporeal subjectivity, what emerges is not only a resolution of the tension through the development of an embodied impersonality (or impersonal embodiment) that accounts for both. We also gain a rich context in which to situate neglected modernist works that were ahead of their time in experimenting with these intersections. Together, these texts suggest a poetic ethics of interpenetration that, when brought to bear on ASL literature, opens the possibilities for how we conceptualize the relationship between writers, texts, and environments. Reading such works together, that is, is beneficial in multiple directions. In the next chapter, I move away from discussions of poetics and ethics to experiment with another way of thinking deafness and modernism together, this time by focusing on Deaf history.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
