<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Deafening Modernism</title>
  <link href="../Styles/default.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="chapter" id="notes">
    <h1 class="ctfm"><a class="page" id="p153"></a><a class="xref" href="../Text/Sanchez-0005.xhtml#toc">Notes</a></h1>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes01">Introduction</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en1r" id="en1">1</a>. Randy Garber, “Conversing and Reversing,” <i>Contemporary Impressions</i> 10.2 (2002): 2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en2r" id="en2">2</a>. Lennard J. Davis, <i>Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body</i> (London: Verso, 1995), 100.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en3r" id="en3">3</a>. “Deafen, v. 1–2,” <i>The Oxford English Dictionary Online</i> (2011), <a class="url" href="http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/47692?redirectedFrom=deafen#eid">http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/47692?redirectedFrom=deafen#eid</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en4r" id="en4">4</a>. Davis 100–101.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en5r" id="en5">5</a>. “Deafen, v. 1–2,” <i>OED Online</i>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en6r" id="en6">6</a>. For additional insights into what such crip epistemologies might look like, see the special double issue of the <i>Journal of Literary and Cultural Disability Studies</i> on “Cripistemologies,” edited by Robert McRuer and Merri Lisa Johnson (vol. 8, nos. 2–3).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en7r" id="en7">7</a>. Davis 124. Following the convention, I use “Deaf” to refer to the cultural minority and “deaf” to refer to the audiological condition of deafness, as well as to describe individuals for whom (either because of age or the time in which they lived) it would not make sense to talk about a Deaf cultural identity. As this book makes clear, however, the distinction between deafness as physical state and deafness as cultural identity is not always (or ever) a clear one. For an excellent critique of this binary division, see Brenda Jo Brueggemann’s <i>Deaf Subjects: Between Identities and Places</i> (New York: New York UP, 2009).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en8r" id="en8">8</a>. Within Deaf studies, the term “Deaf gain” has sometimes been used to counteract the sense of “hearing loss” as a negative experience by developing deafness as a valued identity category. There are times when ideas of Deaf gain overlap with those of Deaf insight or epistemology, but in my reading, Deaf gain functions primarily as a valorization of Deaf people and identity. I focus instead on Deaf epistemology because my interest in this project lies in emphasizing the ways such insight enhances our understanding of culture, history, and language broadly, regardless of hearing status.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p154"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en9r" id="en9">9</a>. Signed languages are not, of course, the only languages that are embodied. What I want to emphasize in using the term is the fact that unlike spoken languages, which can be recorded and played back without any reference to the original speaker, signed communication cannot be separated from the body. I return to this idea at the end of this chapter and elaborate on its implications in chapters 1 and 2, but I would just note here that the politics surrounding this embodiment have dramatically shaped perceptions of ASL in ways that have impacted its usage and development. Perceptions of signed languages have also been shaped by their insistent visibility. As I elaborate on in chapter 1, vision is not the only avenue for accessing signed information. Many DeafBlind individuals communicate using a language called Tactile ASL, which involves signing into the hands of another person. While similar, however, ASL and Tactile ASL are not identical. Because the majority of Deaf signers experience ASL visually and describe both their language and culture in these terms, it is the visual version of the language that is my primary focus.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en10r" id="en10">10</a>. Christopher Krentz’s 2007 <i>Writing Deafness</i>, which examines deaf-authored nineteenth-century texts, as well as deaf characters that appear in the work of hearing writers, and Jennifer Esmail’s 2013 <i>Reading Victorian Deafness</i>, which similarly focuses on the nineteenth century and, where it turns to literary analysis, on deaf characters and authors, are the notable exceptions to an almost complete lack of work on the intersections between English-language literature and Deaf studies. Christopher Krentz, <i>Writing Deafness: The Hearing Line in Nineteenth-Century American Literature</i> (Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 2008); Jennifer Esmail, <i>Reading Victorian Deafness: Signs and Sounds in Victorian Literature and Culture</i> (Athens: Ohio UP, 2013).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en11r" id="en11">11</a>. While I refer to both deafness and disability as critical modes for engaging with literature throughout the book, I do not mean to entirely conflate the two. Many culturally Deaf people consider themselves members of a linguistic minority and very pointedly do not identify as disabled. This disidentification is itself problematic, as it establishes a new hierarchy in which “Deaf” emerges as a privileged term over “disabled.” There remains a great deal of stigma associated with the term “disabled” in common parlance from which it may make pragmatic sense to distance oneself. The deployment of the term within disability studies, however, attempts to overturn such biases, emphasizing the productive force of the concept in ways that often apply to Deaf, as well as other kinds of disability, experiences. It is in this spirit that I use the terms and, at times, permit them to overlap.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en12r" id="en12">12</a>. Toni Morrison, <i>Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1993), 5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en13r" id="en13">13</a>. Lennard J. Davis, introduction, <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>, 2nd ed., ed. Lennard J. Davis (New York: Routledge, 2006), xv.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en14r" id="en14">14</a>. The transitory nature of ability is sometimes registered in disability studies by referring to people as TAB, or temporarily able bodied.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en15r" id="en15">15</a>. Sharon L. Snyder and David T. Mitchell, <i>Cultural Locations of Disability</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006), 7.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en16r" id="en16">16</a>. Lennard J. Davis, <i>Bending Over Backwards: Disability, Dismodernism, and Other Uncomfortable Positions</i> (New York: New York UP, 2002), 2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en17r" id="en17">17</a>. Tobin Siebers, <i>Disability Theory</i> (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008), 25.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en18r" id="en18">18</a>. For a history of the rise of institutional medicine, see Michel Foucault, <i>The Birth of the Clinic</i>, 3rd ed. (New York: Routledge, 2003).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p155"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en19r" id="en19">19</a>. Tom Shakespeare, “The Social Model of Disability,” <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>, 3rd ed., ed. Lennard J. Davis (New York: Routledge, 2010), 269–270.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en20r" id="en20">20</a>. Ibid., 270.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en21r" id="en21">21</a>. Siebers 24. Under the rubric of complex embodiment, I would include nonnormative sensory and intellectual, as well as physical, ways of being.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en22r" id="en22">22</a>. Even within the Deaf community, there was initially resistance to this idea. Deaf people were so accustomed to the mistaken ways hearing linguistics described signed languages that many did not immediately side with Stokoe.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en23r" id="en23">23</a>. William Stokoe, <i>A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic Principles</i> (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 1965).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en24r" id="en24">24</a>. Brueggemann 25.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en25r" id="en25">25</a>. The Clarke School, an oral school for deaf children, for example, advertises its success in providing “children who are deaf and hard of hearing with the listening, learning and spoken language skills they need to succeed.” The school’s philosophy of teaching “children to listen and speak, rather than use sign language,” is intended “to prepare children to succeed in mainstream classrooms alongside their hearing peers,” suggesting a correlation between educational success (as well as the ability to “listen”) and oral language skills. Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech, home page, 2013, <a class="url" href="http://www.clarkeschools.org/">http://www.clarkeschools.org/</a>. There is a direct link between these kinds of messages and the disinclination of parents to teach deaf children to sign or to learn sign language themselves. The numbers are difficult to come by, but it is estimated that only between 3 and 25 percent of hearing parents of deaf children can sign. For more information on the lasting impacts of communication gaps between parents and children, see Cyril Courtin, “The Impact of Sign Language on the Cognitive Development of Deaf Children: The Case of Theories of Mind,” <i>Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education</i> 5.3 (2000): 266.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en26r" id="en26">26</a>. For a complication of the idea that novelty functioned as a motivation for aesthetic innovation in the twentieth century, see chapters 6 and 7 of Michael North’s <i>Novelty: A History of the New</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2013).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en27r" id="en27">27</a>. Richard W. Bailey, <i>Speaking American: A History of English in the United States</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2012), 17. Translation brought close to three hundred new words into English, though significantly fewer remain in usage.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en28r" id="en28">28</a>. Stamp Act, 1765, <a class="url" href="http://ahp.gatech.edu/stamp_act_bp_1765.html">http://ahp.gatech.edu/stamp_act_bp_1765.html</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en29r" id="en29">29</a>. Alexis de Tocqueville, <i>Democracy in America</i> (New York: Penguin, 2003), 554.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en30r" id="en30">30</a>. Bailey 14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en31r" id="en31">31</a>. As David Mitchell, Georgina Kleege, and others have importantly pointed out, the English language problematically uses the verb “to see” to refer to both vision and understanding, a conflation that suggests a general lack of comprehension (or intelligence) on the part of individuals with visual impairments; not “seeing” visually is all too frequently implicitly equated with not “seeing” the meaning of an idea. Throughout <i>Deafening Modernism</i>, I have tried to avoid this usage. Because we have yet to develop a sufficient range of alternative options for expressing the sentiment and its permutations, however, and because repetitive diction is frowned on in publishing, there are moments, such as this one, when I could not find a suitable alternative.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en32r" id="en32">32</a>. U.S. Bureau of the Census, <i>Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970</i> (Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en33r" id="en33">33</a>. This impulse to colonize was not new. The same cultural narratives of exceptionalism and manifest destiny had driven westward expansion and the subjugation <a class="page" id="p156"></a>of indigenous peoples throughout the nineteenth century. What changed in 1989 was that these ideologies increasingly came to be directed overseas, an impulse that only intensified a year later with the closing of the frontier.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en34r" id="en34">34</a>. James W. Schepp, <i>Shepp’s New York City Illustrated</i> (Chicago: Globe Bible Publishing Company, 1894), 455.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en35r" id="en35">35</a>. Ctd. in Bailey 144.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en36r" id="en36">36</a>. Joshua L. Miller, <i>Accented America: The Cultural Politics of Multilingual Modernism</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2011), 9. Perhaps the fiercest proponent of a specifically “American” language was H.&nbsp;L. Mencken, whose 1921 <i>The American Language</i> outlines its benefits as a distinct idiom. See, in particular, the introduction. H.&nbsp;L. Mencken, <i>The American Language: An Inquiry into the Development of English in the United States</i>, 4th ed. (New York: Knopf, 1984).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en37r" id="en37">37</a>. Theodor Roosevelt, 1919, qtd. in James Crawford, <i>At War with Diversity: US Language Policy in an Age of Anxiety</i> (Clevedon, UK: Cromwell, 2000), 8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en38r" id="en38">38</a>. Chap. 127, par. 177, sec. 1. The reference to “American” as the state’s official language remained on the books until 1969, when the legislation was quietly amended to refer to “English.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en39r" id="en39">39</a>. Theodor Roosevelt, “Americanism,” <i>Works of Theodore Roosevelt: Memorial Edition</i>, vol. 20 (New York: Scribner, 1926), 464–465.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en40r" id="en40">40</a>. Miller 36.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en41r" id="en41">41</a>. The ongoing desire to associate American identity with English monolingualism was most recently evidenced by the outcry over the 2014 Coca-Cola Super Bowl commercial, which featured a series of young girls singing “America the Beautiful” in English, Spanish, Tagalog, Mandarin, Hindi, Hebrew, Keres, Senegaleese-French, and Arabic. For more on the controversy, see Ethan Sacks, “Coca Cola’s ‘America the Beautiful’ Super Bowl Commercial Angers Conservative Pundits,” <i>New York Daily News</i> 3 February 2014, <a class="url" href="http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/coca-cola-super-bowl-ad-angers-conservatives-article-1.1600849">http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/coca-cola-super-bowl-ad-angers-conservatives-article-1.1600849</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en42r" id="en42">42</a>. Edward P. Smith, <i>Annual Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to the Secretary of the Interior</i> (Washington, DC: United States Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1874), 8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en43r" id="en43">43</a>. Qtd. in Amelia V. Kantanski, <i>Learning to Write “Indian”: The Boarding School Experience and American Indian Literature</i> (Norman: U of Oklahoma P, 2007), 3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en44r" id="en44">44</a>. For an analysis of the implications of using bodily metaphors to discuss governmental and other nonhuman entities, see David T. Mitchell and Sharon L. Snyder, <i>Narrative Prosthesis: Disability and the Dependencies of Discourse</i> (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2000). I discuss the theory in more detail at the end of this introduction.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en45r" id="en45">45</a>. Qtd. in Kantanski 4.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en46r" id="en46">46</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en47r" id="en47">47</a>. Ibid., 21.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en48r" id="en48">48</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en49r" id="en49">49</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en50r" id="en50">50</a>. Miller 270.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en51r" id="en51">51</a>. George Veditz, “The Preservation of Sign Language,” trans. Carol Padden and Eric Malzkuhn, <i>Deaf World: A Historical Reader and Primary Sourcebook</i>, ed. Lois Bragg (New York: New York UP, 2001), 83.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p157"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en52r" id="en52">52</a>. Plato, <i>Cratylus</i>, trans. C.&nbsp;D.&nbsp;C. Reeve (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998), 1. The fact that Plato’s reference to the signers appears in the context of his discussion of names that express essences suggests fascinating ways in which sign languages might inform our understanding of language more broadly. Unfortunately for the history of philosophy and linguistics, this is his only reference to sign, and these connections go unexplored. For more on Plato’s discussion of the deaf, see H-Dirksen Bauman’s “On the Disconstruction of (Sign) Language in the Western Tradition: A Deaf Reading of Plato’s <i>Cratylus</i>,” <i>Open Your Eyes: Deaf Studies Talking</i>, ed. Bauman (Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2008), 127–145.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en53r" id="en53">53</a>. Leonardo da Vinci, <i>Treatise on Painting</i>, vol. 1, trans. Philip McMahon (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1956), 14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en54r" id="en54">54</a>. René Descartes, <i>Discours de la method</i> (1636), <i>Oeuvres de Descartes</i>, vol. 5, ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery (Paris: Cerf, 1913), 57–58.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en55r" id="en55">55</a>. Qtd. in Jonathan Rée, <i>I See a Voice: Deafness, Language, and the Senses—A Philosophical History</i> (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999), 124.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en56r" id="en56">56</a>. Étienne Bonnot de Condillac, <i>Cours d’instruction du Prince de Parme</i>, vol. 1 (Parma, 1793), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en57r" id="en57">57</a>. Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Johann Gottfried Herder, <i>On the Origin of Language</i>, trans. John H. Moran and Alexander Gode (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1986), 6.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en58r" id="en58">58</a>. Simultaneous Communication (SimCom) is a mode of communication by which one signs and speaks at the same time. Because it is not possible to simultaneously produce two distinct grammars, the signs follow English word order and grammar. SimCom overlaps with Pidgin Signed English (PSE), which mixes ASL signs with English grammar but is not accompanied by speech. The terminology is problematic because it suggests that simultaneous communication is taking place; in practice, what is called SimCom involves a breaking of the grammatical rules of at least one of the languages involved (almost always ASL). Despite this, the phrase is still widely used.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en59r" id="en59">59</a>. Nora Ellen Groce, <i>Everyone Here Spoke Sign Language: Hereditary Deafness on Martha’s Vineyard</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1985), 53.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en60r" id="en60">60</a>. Helmer R. Myklebust, <i>Psychology of Deafness: Sensory Deprivation, Learning, and Adjustment</i> (New York: Grune and Stratton, 1957), 241–242.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en61r" id="en61">61</a>. Qtd. in Margalit Fox, <i>Talking Hands</i> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007), 18–19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en62r" id="en62">62</a>. E.&nbsp;A. Fay, “Tabular Statement of American Schools for the Deaf, 1889,” <i>American Annals of the Deaf and Dumb</i> 35 (1890).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en63r" id="en63">63</a>. Jonathan Sterne, <i>The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction</i> (Durham: Duke UP, 2003), 2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en64r" id="en64">64</a>. Ibid., 16–17.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en65r" id="en65">65</a>. Bell’s father, Alexander Melville Bell, was a scholar of physiological phonetics who created Visible Speech, a method of notation that allowed one to record the movement of the throat, tongue, and lips that an individual made while speaking, as a means to help the deaf learn to speak.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en66r" id="en66">66</a>. Qtd. in Charles Snyder, “Clarence John Blake and Alexander Graham Bell: Otology and the Telephone,” <i>Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology</i> 83.4 (1974): 30.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en67r" id="en67">67</a>. Sterne 40.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p158"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en68r" id="en68">68</a>. Bell’s interest in deaf education was personal as well as professional; both his mother and wife were deaf. Having grown up watching his mother struggle to communicate with a world that did not understand her signs, his faith in oralism was cemented by his perception that his wife, an oral deaf adult, was more easily able to interact in the hearing world.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en69r" id="en69">69</a>. Qtd. in Jack R. Gannon, <i>Deaf Heritage: A Narrative History of Deaf America</i> (Silver Springs, MD: National Association of the Deaf, 1981), 79.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en70r" id="en70">70</a>. Bell was deeply involved with the American eugenics movement. Between 1912 and 1918, he was chairman of the board of scientific advisers to the Eugenics Record Office, and his 1883 lecture <i>Memoir upon the Formation of a Deaf Variety of the Human Race</i> expressed a specific plan for breeding deafness out of the human race. Alexander Graham Bell, <i>Memoir upon the Formation of a Deaf Variety of the Human Race</i> (Washington, DC: Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, 1969).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en71r" id="en71">71</a>. Of the 164 delegates at the 1880 conference, only one, James Denison, was deaf. The resolutions passed at the conference were not formally overturned until the 21st International Conference on Education of the Deaf, held in 2010 in Vancouver, Canada. In America, the National Association of the Deaf (NAD) was founded in direct response to the conference’s attack on signed languages.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en72r" id="en72">72</a>. <i>Audism Unveiled</i>, prod. Benjamin Bahan, H-Dirksen Bauman, and Facundo Montenegro (Dawn Sign, 2008), DVD.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en73r" id="en73">73</a>. James William Sowell, “The Oralist,” <i>Deaf American Poetry: An Anthology</i>, ed. John Lee Clark (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2009), 88, lines 13–14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en74r" id="en74">74</a>. Carol Padden and Tom Humphries, <i>Inside Deaf Culture</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2005), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en75r" id="en75">75</a>. In this way, Deaf kinship might be thought of as more akin to queer identification than to the experience of linguistic, ethnic, or racial minorities.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en76r" id="en76">76</a>. Toni Morrison, <i>Lecture and Speech of Acceptance, upon the Award of the Nobel Prize for Literature, Delivered in Stockholm on the Seventh of December, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-three</i> (New York: Knopf, 1993), 15–16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en77r" id="en77">77</a>. Kantanski 8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en78r" id="en78">78</a>. Ibid., 11–12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en79r" id="en79">79</a>. Willy Conley, “Salt in the Basement: An American Sign Language Reverie in English,” <i>Deaf American Poetry: An Anthology</i>, ed. John Lee Clark (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2009), 195–197, lines 1–18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en80r" id="en80">80</a>. Ibid., lines 33–35.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en81r" id="en81">81</a>. Ibid., lines 48–52.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en82r" id="en82">82</a>. Ibid., line 12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en83r" id="en83">83</a>. Juan A. Suarez, “T.&nbsp;S. Eliot’s <i>The Waste Land</i>, the Gramophone, and the Modernist Discourse Network,” <i>New Literary History</i> 32.3 (2001): 751.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en84r" id="en84">84</a>. Walt Whitman, “A Song of the Rolling Earth,” <i>Walt Whitman: Complete Poetry and Collected Prose</i> (New York: Library of America, 1982), 363.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en85r" id="en85">85</a>. In <i>Extraordinary Bodies</i>, Rosemarie Garland Thomson coins the term “normate” to denaturalize assumptions about normalcy and signal the construction of the “identity of those who, by way of the bodily configurations and cultural capital they assume, can step into a position of authority and wield the power it grants them.” Rosemarie Garland Thomson, <i>Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in American Culture and Literature</i> (New York: Columbia UP, 1997), 8. As Lennard <a class="page" id="p159"></a>Davis argues in chapter 2 of <i>Enforcing Normalcy</i>, the application of the idea of norming to human behavior was a nineteenth century development, one that was linked to industrial development, as well as the emerging fields of statistics and eugenics. Davis, <i>Enforcing Normalcy</i> 23–49.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en86r" id="en86">86</a>. Sarah Wilson, <i>Melting Poet Modernism</i> (Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2010), 49.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en87r" id="en87">87</a>. Ibid., 10.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en88r" id="en88">88</a>. Michael North, <i>The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language and Twentieth-Century Literature</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1994), 1.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en89r" id="en89">89</a>. Hart Crane, “Episode of Hands,” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>. Ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 73, lines 11–15.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en90r" id="en90">90</a>. This work is discussed in greater detail in subsequent chapters.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en91r" id="en91">91</a>. Helen Gilbert, “Dance, Movement and Resistance Politics,” <i>The Post-Colonial Reader</i>, ed. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin (London: Routledge, 1995), 342. Gilbert’s argument was made in reference to Australian Aboriginal dance.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en92r" id="en92">92</a>. Hart Crane, <i>The Bridge</i>, <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 42–108, IV.133–135.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en93r" id="en93">93</a>. Gertrude Stein, “Portraits and Repetition,” <i>Stein 1932–1946</i> (New York: Library of America, 1998), 294.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en94r" id="en94">94</a>. Virginia Woolf, “Pictures,” <i>The Essays of Virginia Woolf: 1925–1928</i>, ed. Andrew McNeillie (London: Hogarth, 1994), 243.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en95r" id="en95">95</a>. Rebecca Beasley, <i>Ezra Pound and the Visual Culture of Modernism</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2008), 4.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en96r" id="en96">96</a>. Martin Jay, <i>Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought</i> (Berkeley: U of California P, 1993), 69. This description is, as Jay himself notes, only a “shorthand way to characterize the dominant scopic regime,” and is not meant to homogenize the diverse approaches to vision that individuals have always had. Ibid., 69–70.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en97r" id="en97">97</a>. P. Adams Sitney, <i>Modernist Montage: The Obscurity of Vision in Cinema and Literature</i> (New York: Columbia UP, 1990), 2. Italics in original.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en98r" id="en98">98</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en99r" id="en99">99</a>. Michael North, <i>Reading 1922: A Return to the Scene of the Modern</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999), 110.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en100r" id="en100">100</a>. Gertrude Stein, <i>Picasso</i> (New York: Dover, 1984), 10.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en101r" id="en101">101</a>. Various attempts have been made over the years to develop written forms of ASL, but none to date have achieved widespread popularity or use.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0007.xhtml#en102r" id="en102">102</a>. Mitchell and Snyder 6.</p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes02">1 / Impersonality: Tradition and the Inescapable Body</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en103r" id="en103">1</a>. H.D., <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i> (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1982), 59.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en104r" id="en104">2</a>. Critiques of this divide begin with Andreas Huyssen’s <i>After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism</i> (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1986).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en105r" id="en105">3</a>. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot, “Tradition and the Individual Talent,” <i>The Sacred Wood and Other Essays</i> (Mineola, NY: Dover, 1998), 32.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en106r" id="en106">4</a>. Ibid., 28.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en107r" id="en107">5</a>. Ibid., 31.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en108r" id="en108">6</a>. Ibid., 32.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en109r" id="en109">7</a>. Homer, <i>The Odyssey</i>, trans. Robert Fagles (New York: Penguin, 1996), 1–3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p160"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en110r" id="en110">8</a>. Jane Chance Nietzsche surveys representations of such genius figures and their relationship to the poetic arts in <i>The Genius Figure in Antiquity and the Middle Ages</i> (New York: Columbia UP, 1975).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en111r" id="en111">9</a>. Maud Ellmann, <i>The Poetics of Impersonality: T.&nbsp;S. Eliot and Ezra Pound</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1987). For more on spiritualism and automatic writing in the early twentieth century, see Charlotte Elizabeth Dresser and Fred Rafferty’s <i>Spirit World and Spirit Life: Automatic Writing</i> (New York: J.&nbsp;F. Rowny, 1922).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en112r" id="en112">10</a>. Eliot, “Tradition,” 33, 30.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en113r" id="en113">11</a>. Ibid., 33.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en114r" id="en114">12</a>. Sharon Cameron, <i>Impersonality: Seven Essays</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2007), ix.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en115r" id="en115">13</a>. Ellmann 34.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en116r" id="en116">14</a>. Ibid., 4. Sharon Cameron makes a similar argument when she notes, “we don’t know what the <i>im</i> of impersonality means” (ix).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en117r" id="en117">15</a>. Yeats explains his theory in “A Packet for Ezra Pound,” printed in <i>A Vision</i> (New York: Kessinger, 2003).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en118r" id="en118">16</a>. Ellmann 197.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en119r" id="en119">17</a>. Rochelle Rives, <i>Modernist Impersonalities: Affect, Authority, and the Subject</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 14–15.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en120r" id="en120">18</a>. In <i>The Death and Return of the Author: Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida</i> (Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 1998), Seán Burke argues that far from rendering writers dead, the shift toward author functions has given them a life after death and that, moreover, the continued circulation of authorial personalities was directly linked to the cultural circulation of their bodies.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en121r" id="en121">19</a>. Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” <i>Image/Music/Text</i>, trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang 1978), 3, 5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en122r" id="en122">20</a>. Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?,” <i>Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology</i>, ed. James D. Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley et al. (New York: New Press, 1994), 205.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en123r" id="en123">21</a>. Galow argues that the emergence of this culture significantly impacted “‘literary’ writing in the decades before World War II” and that it contributed to a “new landscape” in which writers needed to “construct[] . . . public personae.” Galow, <i>Writing Celebrity: Stein, Fitzgerald, and the Modern(ist) Art of Self-Fashioning</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), xi.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en124r" id="en124">22</a>. Ibid., 19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en125r" id="en125">23</a>. For a detailed account of the economics of these tours and their relationship to expansions of literary markets, see chapter 5 of Joan Shelley Rubin’s <i>Songs of Ourselves: The Uses of Poetry in America</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2007), 74–91.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en126r" id="en126">24</a>. Melissa Bradshaw, <i>Amy Lowell: Diva Poet</i> (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2011), 5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en127r" id="en127">25</a>. Galow 28.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en128r" id="en128">26</a>. Amy Lowell, “Spring Day,” <i>The Complete Poetical Works of Amy Lowell</i> (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1925), 145.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en129r" id="en129">27</a>. Witter Bynner nicknamed Lowell “the Hippopoetess,” a moniker picked up on by Ezra Pound, who wrote to Margaret Anderson, “And poor dear Amy. It is only a month ago that I heard someone manifestly not an enemy refer to the ‘Hippopoetess.’” Ezra Pound, <i>The Letters of Ezra Pound to Margaret Anderson: The Little Review Correspondence</i>, ed. Thomas L. Scott and Melvin J. Friedman (New York: New Directions, 1988), 116. Qtd. in Bradshaw 32.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p161"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en130r" id="en130">28</a>. Margaret Widdemer, “The Legend of Amy Lowell,” <i>Texas Quarterly</i> 2 (1963): 196. Qtd. in Bradshaw 29.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en131r" id="en131">29</a>. Conrad Aiken, “An Anatomy of Melancholy,” <i>New Republic</i> (1923): 294. Eliot added a set of notes to the poem for its first American publication in response to critiques that the work was too difficult. Far from clarifying, however, the notes themselves extend the poem’s challenge; they provide a mixture of erudite source materials (which do not in all cases have a readily apparent link to the lines they propose to illuminate), other works in a variety of disciplines that readers are instructed to read, and flippant remarks by Eliot that identify particular portions as incidentally overheard dialogue or emphasize the liberties he has taken in adapting references to suit his purpose.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en132r" id="en132">30</a>. “Shantih, Shantih, Shantih: Has the Reader Any Rights before the Bar of Literature?,” <i>Time</i> 3 March 1923: 12; Charles Powell, “So Much Waste Paper,” <i>Manchester Guardian</i> 31 October 1923: 7.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en133r" id="en133">31</a>. Malcolm Cowley, “The Dilemma of <i>The Waste Land</i>,” <i>The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. Michael North (New York: Norton, 2001), 163.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en134r" id="en134">32</a>. Qtd. in Lawrence Rainey, <i>Institutions of Modernism: Literary Elites and Public Culture</i> (New Haven: Yale UP, 1998), 89. At the time, Wilson was considering publishing the poem himself. James Sibley Watson Jr. to Scofield Thayer, 19 August 1922, Box 44, Folder 1260, The Dial Papers, Yale Collection of American Literature, Mss. 34, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University, New Haven, CT.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en135r" id="en135">33</a>. W.&nbsp;B. Yeats, “Among School Children,” <i>The Collected Poems of W.&nbsp;B. Yeats</i>, 2nd ed., ed. Richard J. Finneran (New York: Scribner, 1989), 215–217, VIII.1–8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en136r" id="en136">34</a>. Ibid., I.8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en137r" id="en137">35</a>. For additional information on the social dynamics of storytelling in contemporary Deaf cultures, see Ben Bahan, “Face-to-Face Tradition in the American Deaf Community: Dynamics of the Teller, the Tale, and the Audience,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), 21–50; and Cynthia Peters, <i>Deaf American Literature: From Carnival to Canon</i> (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2000).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en138r" id="en138">36</a>. Heidi M. Rose, “The Poet in the Poem in the Performance: The Relation of Body, Self, and Text in ASL Literature,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), 136.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en139r" id="en139">37</a>. There is not a great deal of consistency with regard to terminology surrounding DeafBlindness. Throughout <i>Deafening Modernism</i>, I have elected to use “DeafBlind” (as opposed to “Deaf blind,” “deaf-blind,” or any of the other numerous variants) in recognition of the identification with the Deaf community that many signing DeafBlind individuals—those I focus on in this book—feel and to suggest that DeafBlindness itself constitutes both a cultural and experiential reality that is distinct from being “just” Deaf or blind separately and that is also more than the sum of those two identity components. For more information on Tactile ASL, see Johanna Mesch, <i>Tactile Sign Language</i> (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2002) or visit Pro-Tactile: The DeafBlind Way, <a class="url" href="http://www.protactile.org/">http://www.protactile.org/</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en140r" id="en140">38</a>. The tendency to exclude DeafBlind individuals from the Deaf community through this emphasis on vision when talking about Deaf gain is a problem that has only recently begun to be addressed within Deaf studies.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p162"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en141r" id="en141">39</a>. The potential ethical implications of this contact parallel (though, again, may not be identical to) those I outline here.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en142r" id="en142">40</a>. Michael Davidson, <i>Concerto for the Left Hand: Disability and the Defamiliar Body</i> (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008), 119.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en143r" id="en143">41</a>. Peter Cook and Kenneth Lerner, “Poetry,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), DVD. Translated by the author. Direct transliterations from ASL to English do not reflect the complexity of the language used by the signer. For this reason, throughout the book, I have attempted to provide more conceptually accurate summaries of the poems that hopefully gesture toward their linguistic complexity, some of which occurs in modes and dimensions for which there is no exact written-language equivalent.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en144r" id="en144">42</a>. Role shifting enables a signer to communicate from the perspective of various characters in a story and to differentiate between them through body shifting, changes in eye line, nonverbal behaviors, and facial expressions.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en145r" id="en145">43</a>. Rose 140.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en146r" id="en146">44</a>. Perhaps, intriguingly, this also means that one cannot point to a “Cook’s body” distinct from “Poetry.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en147r" id="en147">45</a>. Significantly, because of the ways these poetic experiments diverged from disembodied models of impersonality, they have frequently been perceived as unsophisticated and are largely ignored by general readers and critics alike. Only a few scholarly articles have ever been published on the subject of Anderson’s poetry, as well as one master’s thesis, “The Significance of Sherwood Anderson’s Poetry” by Winfield Scott Lewis, completed in 1961 at Loyola University. A collection of Anderson’s selected works was not available until 2007 (<i>American Spring Song: The Selected Poems of Sherwood Anderson</i>, ed. Stuart Downs [Kent, OH: Kent State UP, 2007]). In terms of scholarly resources, the Modern American Poetry website (companion to Oxford University Press’s <i>Anthology of American Poetry</i>) does not even list Anderson as a poet. Nor does the seventh edition of <i>The Norton Anthology of American Literature</i> (in which he is described solely as a fiction writer) or the third edition of <i>The Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry</i>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en148r" id="en148">46</a>. Eve Feder Kittay, <i>Love’s Labor: Essays on Women, Equality, and Dependency</i> (New York: Routledge, 1998), xii.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en149r" id="en149">47</a>. Kelly Oliver, “Subjectivity as Responsivity: The Ethical Implications of Dependency,” <i>The Subject of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency</i>, ed. Eve Feder Kittay and Ellen K. Feder (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002), 330.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en150r" id="en150">48</a>. Within the context of disabled bodies and the individuals who take care of them in particular, it is specifically suggested that this ethics of care could help to bring about better living and working conditions for the individuals who engage in caretaking work as a major component of their lives, individuals who are predominantly poor women of color. For more on this, see Eva Kittay’s “Dependency, Equality, and Welfare,” <i>Feminist Studies</i> 24.1 (1998): 32–43.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en151r" id="en151">49</a>. Leo Bersani, <i>Intimacies</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2010), 96.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en152r" id="en152">50</a>. Leo Bersani, “Is the Rectum a Grave?,” <i>AIDS: Cultural Analysis&nbsp;/ Cultural Activism</i> 43 (1987): 217. Tim Dean describes a similar pleasurable annihilation in Hart Crane’s poem “Legend,” in which, he argues, “the ‘transmemberment’ of <i>poesis</i> necessitates a metaphysical . . . death, a shattering of the self that paradoxically is attained <a class="page" id="p163"></a>through the self-acknowledgment rendered by kisses.” Tim Dean, “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Privacy,” <i>American Literary History</i> 8.1 (1996): 95.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en153r" id="en153">51</a>. Michel Foucault, “The Social Triumph of the Sexual Will,” <i>The Essential Works of Michel Foucault: Ethics, Subjectivity and Truth</i>, ed. Paul Rabinow (New York: New Press, 1994), 160; Foucault, “Friendship as a Way of Life,” ibid., 138. Foucault continues that the goal is to “escape as much as possible from the types of relations that society proposes for us and try to create in the empty space where we are new relational possibilities” (Foucault, “Social,” 160).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en154r" id="en154">52</a>. Bersani, <i>Intimacies</i>, 642.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en155r" id="en155">53</a>. Luce Irigaray, “The Path toward the Other,” <i>Beckett after Beckett</i>, ed. S.&nbsp;E. Gontarski and Anthony Uhlmann (Gainesville: UP of Florida, 2006), 50.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en156r" id="en156">54</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “A Poet,” <i>A New Testament</i> (New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927), 59,lines 1–8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en157r" id="en157">55</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “Manhattan,” <i>Mid-American Chants</i> (New York: Quale, 2006), 18, lines 12–14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en158r" id="en158">56</a>. Ibid., lines 18–19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en159r" id="en159">57</a>. Ibid., line 8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en160r" id="en160">58</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “Song of Theodore,” <i>Mid-American Chants</i> (New York: Quale, 2006), 15–17, lines 3–8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en161r" id="en161">59</a>. Ibid., lines 62–63.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en162r" id="en162">60</a>. Ibid., lines 75–79.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en163r" id="en163">61</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “The Healer,” <i>A New Testament</i> (New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927), 26–27, lines 1–6.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en164r" id="en164">62</a>. Ibid., lines 7, 26.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en165r" id="en165">63</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “Song for Lonely Roads,” <i>Mid-American Chants</i>(New York: Quale, 2006), 49, lines 4–6, 19–22.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en166r" id="en166">64</a>. <i>Leaves of Grass</i> opens with the assertion, “I celebrate myself, / And what I assume you shall assume, / For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you,” and later inquires, “Who need be afraid of the merge?” Walt Whitman, <i>Leaves of Grass 1855</i>, <i>Walt Whitman: Complete Poetry and Collected Prose</i> (New York: Library of America, 1982), 27, 33.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en167r" id="en167">65</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “The Cornfields,” <i>Mid-American Chants</i> (New York: Quale, 2006), 1–2, lines 16–18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en168r" id="en168">66</a>. Anderson, “Manhattan,” lines 18–19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en169r" id="en169">67</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “Word Factories,” <i>A New Testament</i> (New York: Boni and Liveright, 1927), 85–88, lines 1.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en170r" id="en170">68</a>. Ibid., lines 21–22, 22–26.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en171r" id="en171">69</a>. Ibid., lines 43–46.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en172r" id="en172">70</a>. Ibid., lines 54–60.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en173r" id="en173">71</a>. Anderson, “The Healer,” lines 1–11.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en174r" id="en174">72</a>. Bahan,43.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en175r" id="en175">73</a>. For more information on the role of eye movement in ASL, see Clayton Valli, Ceil Lucas, and Kristin J. Mulrooney, <i>Linguistics of American Sign Language: An Introduction</i>, 4th ed. (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2005).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en176r" id="en176">74</a>. Emmanuel Levinas, <i>Entre Nous: On Thinking-of-the-Other</i>, trans. Michael B. Smith and Barbara Harshav (New York: Columbia UP, 1998), 145; Levinas, <i>Humanism of the Other</i>, trans. Nidra Poller (Urbana: U of Illinois P, 2006), 67.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p164"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en177r" id="en177">75</a>. To be clear, “human” and “language user” are not equivalent terms. While not all humans use language, however, all language users are human, enabling the recognition.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en178r" id="en178">76</a>. Jennifer Esmail, “The Power of Deaf Poetry: The Exhibition of Literacy and the Nineteenth-Century Sign Language Debates,” <i>Sign Language Studies</i> 8.4 (2008): 350.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en179r" id="en179">77</a>. George Oppen, “Of Being Numerous,” <i>George Oppen: Selected Poems</i>, ed. Robert Creeley (New York: New Directions, 2001), 83–109, VII.1–5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en180r" id="en180">78</a>. Debbie Rennie, “Missing Children,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), DVD. “Missing Children” was composed in collaboration with Kenny Lerner. Translated by author. I discuss the poem in the context of philosophies of the voice in Rebecca Sanchez, “‘Human Bodies Are Words’: Towards a Theory of Non-verbal Voice,” <i>College English Association Critic</i> 73.3 (2012): 32–46.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en181r" id="en181">79</a>. Classifiers are specific handshapes used to indicate additional information about nouns and verbs, including location, shape, size, and style of movement.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0008.xhtml#en182r" id="en182">80</a>. To emphasize the multiple levels of layering occurring at this point in the poem, Rennie is mimicking a child who is mimicking an adult character. In a strategy that gestures toward the section’s moral ambiguities, the intertwined bodies of the subjects inhabited by Rennie stand in for the bodies not shown: those twisted by the explosion of the bombs.</p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes03">2 / Primitivism: Communicative Norms and the Ethics of the Story</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en183r" id="en183">1</a>. Sieglinde Lemke, <i>Primitivist Modernism: Black Culture and the Origins of Transatlantic Modernism</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1998), 5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en184r" id="en184">2</a>. Filippo Tomaso Marinetti, “The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism 1909,” <i>Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents</i>, ed. Vassiliki Kolocotroni, Jane Goldman, and Olga Taxidou (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1998), 251.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en185r" id="en185">3</a>. As Michael North points out in <i>Novelty: A History of the New</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2013), the phrase “make it new” was a translation of an ancient Chinese source, and its use by Pound postdated the period typically thought of as “high” modernist.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en186r" id="en186">4</a>. Phyllis Rose, <i>Jazz Cleopatra</i> (New York: Random House, 1989), 47.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en187r" id="en187">5</a>. Carole Sweeney, <i>From Fetish to Subject: Race, Modernism, and Primitivism, 1919–1935</i> (New York: Praeger, 2004), 51.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en188r" id="en188">6</a>. Robert Goldwater, <i>Primitivism in Modern Art</i> (New York: Belknap, 1986), 35.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en189r" id="en189">7</a>. Sweeney 51.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en190r" id="en190">8</a>. Elazar Barkan and Ronald Bush, introduction, <i>Prehistories of the Future: The Primitivist Project and the Culture of Modernism</i>, ed. Barkan and Bush (Stanford: Stanford UP, 1995), 2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en191r" id="en191">9</a>. Qtd. in Stephen Kern, <i>The Culture of Time and Space, 1880–1915</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2003), 206.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en192r" id="en192">10</a>. Theodor Adorno, <i>Minima Moralia: Reflections on a Damaged Life</i>, trans. E.&nbsp;F.&nbsp;N. Jepheott (London: Verso, 2005), 47.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en193r" id="en193">11</a>. “Norm, n. 1,” <i>The Oxford English Dictionary Online</i> (2011), <a class="url" href="http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/128266?rskey=rsFvLW&amp;result=1&amp;isAdvanced=false.">http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/128266?rskey=rsFvLW&amp;result=1&amp;isAdvanced=false.</a></p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en194r" id="en194">12</a>. Lennard J. Davis, introduction, <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>, 2nd ed., ed. Davis (New York: Routledge, 2006), 6.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p165"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en195r" id="en195">13</a>. For more on the relationship between disabled bodies and the American body politic, see Emily Russell, <i>Reading Embodied Citizenship: Disability, Narrative, and the American Body Politic</i> (New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 2011).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en196r" id="en196">14</a>. For more on the impact of boarding schools on American Indian literature and language use, see Amelia V. Katanski, <i>Learning to Write “Indian”: The Boarding School Experience and American Indian Literature</i> (Norman: U of Oklahoma P, 2007).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en197r" id="en197">15</a>. Qtd. in Alan Taylor, <i>Writing Early American History</i> (Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2006), 24.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en198r" id="en198">16</a>. David Appelbaum, <i>Voice</i> (Albany: State U of New York P, 1990), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en199r" id="en199">17</a>. Lennard J. Davis, <i>Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body</i> (London: Verso, 1995), 20.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en200r" id="en200">18</a>. Qtd. in Fatimah Tobing Rony, <i>The Third Eye: Race, Cinema, and Ethnographic Spectacle</i> (Durham: Duke UP, 1996), 3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en201r" id="en201">19</a>. Qtd. in Douglas C. Baynton, “A Silent Exile on This Earth: The Metaphorical Construction of Deafness in the Nineteenth-Century,” <i>The Disability Studies Reader</i>, 2nd ed., ed. Lennard J. Davis (New York: Routledge, 2006), 42. Garrett was a graduate of Alexander Graham Bell’s program for instructing teachers of the deaf.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en202r" id="en202">20</a>. Qtd. in ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en203r" id="en203">21</a>. Qtd. in ibid., 43.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en204r" id="en204">22</a>. Qtd. in Douglas Baynton, <i>Forbidden Signs: American Culture and the Campaign against Sign Language</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996), 43.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en205r" id="en205">23</a>. In an excellent chapter analyzing the issue of deaf intermarriage in the Victorian period, Jennifer Esmail argues that it was the emergence of eugenics that propelled the sign-language debates from a private issue pertaining to deaf people and educators into a public threat. Jennifer Esmail, <i>Reading Victorian Deafness: Signs and Sounds in Victorian Literature and Culture</i> (Athens: Ohio UP, 2013), 136.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en206r" id="en206">24</a>. Qtd. in Carol Padden and Tom Humphries, <i>Inside Deaf Culture</i> (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2005), 106. For more information on how this history impacted the development of a distinct Black ASL, see Carolyn McCaskill, Ceil Lucas, Robert Bayley, and Joseph Hill, <i>The Hidden Treasure of Black ASL: Its History and Structure</i> (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2011).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en207r" id="en207">25</a>. Baynton, <i>Forbidden Signs</i>, 46.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en208r" id="en208">26</a>. Qtd. in Albert Ballin, <i>The Deaf Mute Howls</i> (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 1998), 78.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en209r" id="en209">27</a>. See Henri Bergson, <i>Laughter: An Essay on the Comic</i> (New York: Arc Manor, 2008).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en210r" id="en210">28</a>. Winston Churchill, “Everybody’s Language,” <i>Collier’s</i> 26 October 1935, rpt. <i>The Essential Chaplin: Perspectives on the Life and Art of the Great Comedian</i>, ed. Richard Schieckel (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2006), 210. Churchill’s description of Chaplin’s pantomimic skills was close to Chaplin’s own assessment, in his 1964 autobiography. Describing his reluctance to move into the world of talking films, Chaplin explains, “I was determined to continue making silent films, for I believed there was room for all types of entertainment. Besides, I was a pantomimist, and in that medium I was unique and, without false modesty, master. So I continued with the production of another silent picture, <i>City Lights</i>.” Charles Chaplin, <i>My Autobiography</i> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1964), 325.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en211r" id="en211">29</a>. Churchill 214.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p166"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en212r" id="en212">30</a>. Ibid., 212.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en213r" id="en213">31</a>. R.&nbsp;P. Blackmur, <i>Language as Gesture: Essays in Poetry</i> (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1952), 6.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en214r" id="en214">32</a>. Ibid., 7.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en215r" id="en215">33</a>. Ibid., 22.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en216r" id="en216">34</a>. Ibid., 12–13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en217r" id="en217">35</a>. Ibid., 19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en218r" id="en218">36</a>. Mikhail Bakhtin, <i>Rabelais and His World</i>, trans. Helene Iswolsky (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1984), 48.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en219r" id="en219">37</a>. Sherwood Anderson, <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> (New York: Penguin, 1992), 24.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en220r" id="en220">38</a>. Ibid., 71.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en221r" id="en221">39</a>. Ibid., 103.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en222r" id="en222">40</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en223r" id="en223">41</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en224r" id="en224">42</a>. Ibid., 197.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en225r" id="en225">43</a>. Ibid., 198.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en226r" id="en226">44</a>. Ibid., 130.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en227r" id="en227">45</a>. Ibid., 141.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en228r" id="en228">46</a>. Ibid., 135, 137.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en229r" id="en229">47</a>. Ibid, 142.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en230r" id="en230">48</a>. Ibid., 167–168.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en231r" id="en231">49</a>. Ibid., 169.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en232r" id="en232">50</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en233r" id="en233">51</a>. Ibid., 170.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en234r" id="en234">52</a>. Ibid., 171.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en235r" id="en235">53</a>. Ibid., 87.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en236r" id="en236">54</a>. Ibid., 91.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en237r" id="en237">55</a>. Ibid., 96.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en238r" id="en238">56</a>. In doing so, Anderson anticipates the social model, which, as I discussed in the introduction, locates disability in restrictive social conditions that limit individuals’ access, rather than in the bodies of individuals themselves. This thinking about disability has been incredibly important in the disability rights movement but has more recently come under criticism for failing to fully account for the lived realities of those who do consider their bodies to be disabled.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en239r" id="en239">57</a>. Bill Solomon, “The Novel in Distress,” <i>Novel</i> 43.1 (2010): 130.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en240r" id="en240">58</a>. E.M. Forster, <i>Aspects of the Novel</i> (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1954), 45–46.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en241r" id="en241">59</a>. Sherwood Anderson, “The Modern Writer,” <i>Homage to Sherwood Anderson, 1876–1941</i>, ed. Paul P. Appel (Mamaroneck, NY: Paul P. Appel, 1970), 174.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en242r" id="en242">60</a>. Solomon 124.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en243r" id="en243">61</a>. Karl Kroeber, <i>Retelling/Rereading: The Fate of Storytelling in Modern Times</i> (New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1990), 4.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en244r" id="en244">62</a>. While Deaf culture is not an obvious site for discussion of oral cultures, it can illuminate the ways in which the elements of oral cultures that intrigued Anderson might play out in modern, literate ones. As J.&nbsp;P. Gee argues, “ASL exists in an ‘oral’ culture, a culture based on face-to-face signed interaction. Like many other such cultures, it has an active tradition of folklore and performance-centered ‘oral’ <a class="page" id="p167"></a>(signed) narratives, encapsulating traditional values, and passed down from generation to generation.” J.&nbsp;P. Gee and Walter J. Ong, “An Exchange on American Sign Language and Deaf Culture: J.&nbsp;P. Gee and Walter J. Ong,” <i>Language and Style: An International Journal</i> 16.2 (1983): 232. Part of what examining such contemporary cultures emphasizes is the radical destabilization that occurs when the text and the author’s body become inseparable, as was the case in ancient oral cultures and remains so in modern Deaf ones.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en245r" id="en245">63</a>. Anderson, <i>Winesburg, Ohio</i>, 27.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en246r" id="en246">64</a>. Ibid., 28.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en247r" id="en247">65</a>. Thomas Yingling, “<i>Winesburg, Ohio</i> and the End of Collective Experience,” <i>New Essays on Winesburg, Ohio</i>, ed. John W. Crowley (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1990), 115.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en248r" id="en248">66</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en249r" id="en249">67</a>. As Robert McRuer insightfully points out in <i>Crip Theory</i>, “compulsory heterosexuality is contingent on compulsory able-bodiedness, and vice versa.” The two function as “wedded but invisible” manifestations of modern society’s obsession with the establishment and maintenance of physical norms. Robert McRuer, <i>Crip Theory: Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability</i> (New York: New York UP, 2006), 2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en250r" id="en250">68</a>. Anderson, <i>Winesburg</i>, 32.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en251r" id="en251">69</a>. Ibid., 32.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en252r" id="en252">70</a>. Ibid., 27.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en253r" id="en253">71</a>. Ibid., 32, 30.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en254r" id="en254">72</a>. Ibid., 29.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en255r" id="en255">73</a>. Ibid., 28–29.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en256r" id="en256">74</a>. Ibid., 28.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en257r" id="en257">75</a>. Ibid., 194.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0009.xhtml#en258r" id="en258">76</a>. Ibid., 28.</p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes04">3 / Difficulty: Juxtaposition, Indeterminacy, and the Linguistics of Simultaneity</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en259r" id="en259">1</a>. Joshua L. Miller’s <i>Accented America: The Cultural Politics of Multilingual Modernism</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2011) and Sarah Wilson’s <i>Melting-Pot Modernism</i> (Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2010), for example, both give excellent accounts of the impact of attempts to standardize American English on various ethnic and linguistic minorities without touching on the ways these same pressures affected disabled Americans.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en260r" id="en260">2</a>. In <i>The Dialect of Modernism</i>, Michael North cites the careers of Claude McKay and T.&nbsp;S. Eliot as examples of the dramatically different outcomes faced by writers who engaged in high levels of formal experimentation, on of the basis of their subject positions. In the 1930s, Eliot was celebrated as a well-respected representative of modernism, while McKay found so few opportunities for publication that he ended up in a state work camp. Michael North, <i>The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language and Twentieth-Century Literature</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1994), 127.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en261r" id="en261">3</a>. Tim Armstrong, <i>Modernism, Technology and the Body</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1998), 4–5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en262r" id="en262">4</a>. David T. Mitchell and Sharon L. Snyder, <i>Narrative Prosthesis: Disability and the Dependencies of Discourse</i> (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2000), 9. In the introduction to the book, Mitchell and Snyder define four components of narrative prosthesis:</p>

        <p class="ntbqs"><a class="page" id="p168"></a>First, narrative prosthesis refers to the pervasiveness of disability as a device of characterization in narrative art. Second, it enables a contrast between the prosthetic leanings of mainstream discourses that would disguise or obliterate the evidence of physical and cognitive differences, and literary efforts that expose prosthesis as an artificial, and thus, re-signifiable relation. Third, it refers to the problematic nature of the literary transgressive ideal in relation to social violence that often issues from the repetition of a representational formula (or antiformula). . . . Finally, it acknowledges that literary representation bears on the production and realization of disabled subjectivities.</p>

        <p class="enp">One of the best-known examples of this phenomenon in relation to the First World War is Septimus Warren Smith in Virginia Woolf’s <i>Mrs. Dalloway</i>, whose inability to reintegrate into London life after serving is used to highlight the deep fissures and traumas running throughout the city and characters even as they go about their daily routines.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en263r" id="en263">5</a>. T.&nbsp;S Eliot, “The Metaphysical Poets,” <i>Selected Prose of T.&nbsp;S. Eliot</i>, ed. Frank Kermode (San Diego: Harcourt, 1975), 65.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en264r" id="en264">6</a>. Leonard Diepeveen, <i>The Difficulties of Modernism</i> (New York: Routledge, 2003), xiii.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en265r" id="en265">7</a>. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot, “The Waste Land,” <i>T.&nbsp;S. Eliot: The Complete Poems and Plays, 1909–1950</i> (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1950), 37. Significantly, the epigraph remains untranslated and unattributed in the poem’s notes.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en266r" id="en266">8</a>. Andreas Huyssen, <i>After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism</i> (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1986), viii. As Huyssen explains, “Modernism constituted itself through a conscious strategy of exclusion, an anxiety of contamination by its other: an increasingly consuming and engulfing mass culture.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en267r" id="en267">9</a>. Eliot, <i>The Waste Land</i>, 37. Significant for thinking about the tension between personality and impersonality in Eliot’s work, this passage from <i>Purgatorio</i> moves increasingly away from the notion of the author as individual genius and toward the idea of a lineage of great writers. The pilgrim encounters Guinizelli and is somewhat starstruck. Guinizelli in turn identifies Daniel as “the better craftsman.” Dante Alighieri, <i>The Divine Comedy</i>, trans. Robert Kirkpatrick (New York: Penguin, 2013). In <i>The Spirit of Romance</i> (1910), Pound similarly acknowledges his indebtedness to both Daniel and Dante. Ezra Pound, <i>The Spirit of Romance</i> (Norfolk: New Directions, 1929).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en268r" id="en268">10</a>. Eliot, <i>The Waste Land</i>, 37. For analysis of Pound’s role in the composition of <i>The Waste Land</i>, as well as reproductions of his editing marks, see T.&nbsp;S. Eliot, <i>The Waste Land: A Facsimile and Transcript of the Original Drafts Including the Annotations of Ezra Pound</i>, ed. Valerie Eliot (San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1971).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en269r" id="en269">11</a>. Marjorie Perloff, <i>The Poetics of Indeterminacy: Rimbaud to Cage</i> (Evanston, IL: Northwestern UP, 1999), 16, 18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en270r" id="en270">12</a>. Hart Crane, “A Letter to Harriet Monroe,” <i>Hart Crane: Complete Poems and Selected Letters</i>, ed. Langdon Hammer (New York: Library of America, 2006), 165.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en271r" id="en271">13</a>. This is, significantly, not the only way to read the poem. But it has remained, coming up to a century after its publication, the predominant interpretation attached to it. Early reviews of the work set the tone. Although Conrad Aiken found the poem ultimately successful, he described it as “an anatomy of melancholy.” Conrad Aiken, “An Anatomy of Melancholy,” <i>The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. Michael <a class="page" id="p169"></a>North (New York: Norton, 2001), 148. Malcolm Cowley, who again is careful to celebrate the poem as a paragon of modernist qualities, finds it a “problem” because, according to him, it situates all dignity and meaning in the past. “Our age,” by contrast, “was prematurely senile and could not even find words of its own in which to bewail its impotence; that it was forever condemned to borrow and patch together the songs of dead poets.” Malcolm Cowley, “The Dilemma of <i>The Waste Land</i>,” <i>The Waste Land: A Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. Michael North (New York: Norton, 2001), 164.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en272r" id="en272">14</a>. This involvement of the reader in the process of creating poetry was explicitly acknowledged by Crane, if not by Eliot. In Crane’s explanation of his particular flavor of difficulty, he notes, “It implies (this <i>inflection</i> of language) a previous or prepared receptivity to its stimulus on the part of the reader. The reader’s sensibility simply responds by identifying this inflection of experience with some event in his own history or perceptions—or rejects it altogether. The logic of metaphor is so organically entrenched in pure sensibility that it can’t be thoroughly traced or explained outside of historical sciences, like philology and anthropology.” Crane, “Letter to Harriet Monroe,” 166.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en273r" id="en273">15</a>. Diepeveen, xiv–v.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en274r" id="en274">16</a>. Structural linguistics had a particularly significant impact on the development of close reading practices associated with New Criticism.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en275r" id="en275">17</a>. Ferdinand de Saussure, <i>Course in General Linguistics</i>, ed. Perry Meisel and Haun Saussy, trans. Wade Baskin (Peru, IL: Open Court, 1972), 69–70.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en276r" id="en276">18</a>. Ibid., 70.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en277r" id="en277">19</a>. Signed languages constitute languages because they are complex, arbitrary systems of symbolic communication that employ standardized grammatical and syntactical rules.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en278r" id="en278">20</a>. Some people have argued that shifts in intonation and gesture constitute additional channels through which information can be communicated during a spoken utterance. The general consensus, however, is that these channels represent extralinguistic information and that spoken languages operate through fewer articulators than do manual ones. As Bencie Woll puts it, “the linearity of spoken language and the simultaneity of signed languages are artifacts of the modalities in which they occur.” Bencie Woll, “Perspectives on Linearity and Simultaneity,” <i>Simultaneity in Signed Languages: Form and Function</i>, ed. Myriam Vermeerbergen, Lorraine Leeson, and Onno A. Crasborn (New York: John Benjamins, 2007), 340.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en279r" id="en279">21</a>. There is a parallel in the way the tactile system functions for signing DeafBlind individuals. While tactile ASL incorporates fewer channels than visually processed sign—the majority of the linguistic information is expressed through the hands and arms—backchanneling can be used to encode grammatical information from the face that is not being visually processed. Backchanneling involves using the non-receiving hand—usually through a series of taps on the receiver’s arm or leg—to provide information to that which would otherwise be registered visually. Much more research needs to be done to investigate the similarities between backchanneling and the simultaneous reception of multiple channels of information in visually received signing.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en280r" id="en280">22</a>. Howard Poizner, Edward S. Klima, and Ursula Bellugi, <i>What the Hands Reveal about the Brain</i> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987), 30.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en281r" id="en281">23</a>. Margalit Fox, <i>Talking Hands</i> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007), 101.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en282r" id="en282">24</a>. Ibid., 159.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p170"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en283r" id="en283">25</a>. Padden has also identified a subclass of words she terms “backwards verbs,” which move through space from object to subject. This group includes words such as “copy” and “invite.” Carol A. Padden, <i>Interaction of Morphology and Syntax in American Sign Language</i> (New York: Garland, 1988).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en284r" id="en284">26</a>. Fox 169.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en285r" id="en285">27</a>. For more information on adverbs in ASL, see D.&nbsp;E. Anderson and J.&nbsp;S. Reilly, “Pah! The Acquisition of Adverbials in ASL,” <i>Sign Language and Linguistics</i> 1.2 (1998): 117–142.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en286r" id="en286">28</a>. David Cornia, Ursula Bellugi, and Judy Reilly, “Neuropsychological Studies of Linguistic and Affective Facial Expressions in Deaf Signers,” <i>Language and Speech</i> 42.203 (1999): 310.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en287r" id="en287">29</a>. Clayton Valli, “Tears of Life,” <i>ASL Poetry: Selected Works of Clayton Valli</i> (San Diego: Dawn Pictures, 1995), DVD. Translated by the author. A version of the poem, signed by Vivienne Simmons, can be found on YouTube: Peter Quint, “Poem—Tears of Live.mov,” YouTube, 15 July 2010, <a class="url" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_A5KIyg-q88">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_A5KIyg-q88</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en288r" id="en288">30</a>. In “Portraits and Repetition,” Stein explains, “I am inclined to believe there is no such thing as repetition. And really how can there be. . . . There can be no repetition because the essence of that expression is insistence, and if you insist you must each time use emphasis and if you use emphasis it is not possible while anybody is alive that they should use exactly the same emphasis.” Gertrude Stein, “Portraits and Repetitions,” <i>Stein: Writings 1932–1946</i> (New York: Library of America, 1998), 288.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en289r" id="en289">31</a>. W.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;T. Mitchell, “Preface: Utopian Gestures,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), xx.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en290r" id="en290">32</a>. The title of the section occurs in Hart Crane, “The Wine Menagerie,” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 23–24, line 29.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en291r" id="en291">33</a>. Elisa New, “Hand of Fire: Crane,” <i>The Regenerate Lyric: Theology and Innovation in American Poetry</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1993), 184.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en292r" id="en292">34</a>. In “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Privacy,” Tim Dean links Crane’s distinct version of difficulty to an ontological difficulty derived from the poet’s experiences of private gay-male codes of behavior. As Dean explains, “The poems in <i>White Buildings</i> [the collection in which “Voyages” first appeared] are constructed not according to the logic of a more or less legible homosexual code but according to the logic of a radical privacy that attempts to circumvent the very possibility-condition of such a code by constructing a form of privacy alternate to that of the closet.” Tim Dean, “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Privacy, <i>American Literary History</i> 8.1 (1996): 101.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en293r" id="en293">35</a>. Harold Bloom, introduction, <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Mark Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), xii.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en294r" id="en294">36</a>. Edward J. Brunner, <i>Splendid Failure: Hart Crane and the Making of “The Bridge”</i> (Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1985); R.&nbsp;P. Blackmur, <i>Language as Gesture: Essays in Poetry</i> (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1952), 316.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en295r" id="en295">37</a>. Joseph Riddel, “Hart Crane’s Poetics of Failure,” <i>ELH</i> 33.4 (1966): 473.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en296r" id="en296">38</a>. Hart Crane, “General Aims and Theories,” <i>Hart Crane: Complete Poems and Selected Letters</i>, ed. Langdon Hammer (New York: Library of America, 2006), 161.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en297r" id="en297">39</a>. Ibid., 163, 164.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p171"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en298r" id="en298">40</a>. Crane, “The Wine Menagerie,” line 29; Crane, “Voyages,” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 34–40, IV.17.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en299r" id="en299">41</a>. Like “The Wine Menagerie” and “Voyages,” “At Melville’s Tomb” was originally published in Crane’s 1926 <i>White Buildings</i>. Hart Crane, “At Melville’s Tomb,” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 33.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en300r" id="en300">42</a>. Crane, “General Aims and Theories,” 163.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en301r" id="en301">43</a>. Crane, “Letter to Harriet Monroe,” 165; “General Aims and Theories,” 163.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en302r" id="en302">44</a>. “General Aims and Theories,” 163; Hart Crane, “The Broken Tower,” <i>The Complete Poems of Hart Crane: The Centennial Edition</i>, ed. Marc Simon (New York: Liveright, 2001), 161–162, line 23; Crane, “Voyages,” VI.29.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en303r" id="en303">45</a>. Hart Crane, <i>O My Land, My Friends: The Selected Letters of Hart Crane</i>, ed. Langdon Hammer and Brom Weber (New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 1997), 186.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en304r" id="en304">46</a>. Crane, “Voyages,” I.2–16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en305r" id="en305">47</a>. Evelyn J. Hintz, “Hart Crane’s ‘Voyages’ Reconsidered,” <i>Contemporary Literature</i> 13.3 (1972): 323.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en306r" id="en306">48</a>. Crane, “Voyages,” II.1–5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en307r" id="en307">49</a>. Bloom xxi; Crane, “Voyages,” II.25.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en308r" id="en308">50</a>. Perloff, 16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en309r" id="en309">51</a>. Crane, “Voyages,” II.16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en310r" id="en310">52</a>. Ibid., II.17–18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en311r" id="en311">53</a>. Ibid., II.14–15.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en312r" id="en312">54</a>. Ibid., IV.12–13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en313r" id="en313">55</a>. Ibid., IV.17–19.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en314r" id="en314">56</a>. Ibid., VI.23, VI.21.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en315r" id="en315">57</a>. Thomas Yingling, <i>Hart Crane and the Homosexual Text: New Thresholds, New Anatomies</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1990), 30.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en316r" id="en316">58</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en317r" id="en317">59</a>. Crane, <i>O My Land, My Friends</i>, 287.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en318r" id="en318">60</a>. Crane, “Voyages,” III.18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en319r" id="en319">61</a>. Crane, <i>O My Land, My Friends</i>, 186.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en320r" id="en320">62</a>. Crane, “Voyages,” V.8–9.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en321r" id="en321">63</a>. Ibid., V.13–14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en322r" id="en322">64</a>. Ibid., V.11–12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en323r" id="en323">65</a>. Ibid., V.20, V.12–13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en324r" id="en324">66</a>. Ibid., V.22–24.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en325r" id="en325">67</a>. Neil Schmitz, “Gertrude Stein as Post-Modernist: The Rhetoric of ‘Tender Buttons,’” <i>Journal of Modern Literature</i> 3.5 (1974): 1205.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en326r" id="en326">68</a>. Ibid., 1206.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en327r" id="en327">69</a>. Gertrude Stein, “Composition as Explanation.” <i>Stein: Writings 1903–1932</i> (New York: Library of America, 1998), 520.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en328r" id="en328">70</a>. Ibid., 522.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en329r" id="en329">71</a>. Gertrude Stein, “A Transatlantic Interview,” <i>The Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry</i>, 3rd ed., vol. 1, ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair (New York: Norton, 2003), 988.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p172"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en330r" id="en330">72</a>. Marcel Duchamp, <i>Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2</i>, 1912, oil on canvas, 147 cm × 89.2 cm, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en331r" id="en331">73</a>. Stein, “Composition as Explanation,” 524. Stein defines a “continuous present” as follows: “A continuous present is a continuous present. I made almost a thousand pages of a continuous present. Continuous present is one thing and beginning again and again is another thing.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en332r" id="en332">74</a>. Jamie Hilder, “‘After All One Must Know More than One Sees and One Does Not See a Cube in Its Entirety’: Gertrude Stein and Picasso and Cubism,” <i>Critical Survey</i> 17.1 (2005): 81.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en333r" id="en333">75</a>. Gertrude Stein, <i>Tender Buttons</i>, <i>Stein: Writings 1932–1946</i> (New York: Library of America, 1998), 313.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en334r" id="en334">76</a>. As Haselstein notes, Stein avoids “description, condensation, and the ‘iconic’ form of encompassing categorization, but also narrativization, empathy, and psychological theorizing.” Ulla Haselstein, “Gertrude Stein’s Portraits of Matisse and Picasso,” <i>New Literary History</i> 34.4 (2003): 727.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en335r" id="en335">77</a>. The most famous example of this from modernist literature can be found in the opening of James Joyce’s “Araby”: “North Richmond Street, being blind, was a quiet street except at the hour when the Christian Brothers’ School set the boys free.” James Joyce, <i>Dubliners: A Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. Margot Norris (New York: Norton, 2006), 20.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en336r" id="en336">78</a>. “Spectacle, noun,” <i>The Oxford English Dictionary Online</i> (2009), <a class="url" href="http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/186057?rskey=PqPMmz&amp;result=1&amp;isAdvanced=false#eid">http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/186057?rskey=PqPMmz&amp;result=1&amp;isAdvanced=false#eid</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en337r" id="en337">79</a>. Rosemarie Garland Thompson, introduction, <i>Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body</i>, ed. Thompson (New York: New York UP, 1996), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en338r" id="en338">80</a>. “Spectacle, noun,” <i>OED Online</i>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en339r" id="en339">81</a>. For more on the politics of looking, see Rosemarie Garland Thomson, <i>Staring: How We Look</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en340r" id="en340">82</a>. James E. Breslin, “William Carlos Williams and Charles Demuth: Cross-Fertilization in the Arts,” <i>Journal of Modern Literature</i> 6.2 (1977): 248.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en341r" id="en341">83</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en342r" id="en342">84</a>. Edward A. Aiken, “‘I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold’: Charles Demuth’s Emblematic Portrait of William Carlos Williams,” <i>Art Journal</i> 46.3 (1987): 179.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en343r" id="en343">85</a>. William Carlos Williams, <i>The Autobiography of William Carlos Williams</i> (New York: New Directions, 1967), 172.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en344r" id="en344">86</a>. William Carlos Williams, “The Great Figure,” <i>William Carlos Williams: Selected Poems</i>, ed. Charles Tomlinson (New York: New Directions, 1985), 36.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en345r" id="en345">87</a>. Breslin 256.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en346r" id="en346">88</a>. A similar ironic displacement occurs after the suicide of Septimus Smith in Virginia Woolf’s <i>Mrs. Dalloway</i>, as the text jerks abruptly away from the bloody end of the young man’s life to focus on Peter Walsh, who, seeing the ambulance carrying Septimus’s body to hospital, muses, “One of the triumphs of civilization. . . . It is one of the triumphs of civilization, as the light high bell of the ambulance sounded,” despite the fact that it is precisely “civilization” that has led to Septimus’s demise. As in Williams’s poem, whatever personal calamity required the summoning of the emergency response vehicle is swept away in the face of the speaker’s identification of the symbol of modern speed and efficiency. Virginia Woolf, <i>Mrs. Dalloway</i> (San Diego: Harcourt, 1981), 151.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0010.xhtml#en347r" id="en347">89</a>. Breslin 263.</p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes05"><a class="page" id="p173"></a>4 / The Image: Cinematic Poetics and Deaf Vision</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en348r" id="en348">1</a>. As Georgina Kleege explains, while some specialists distinguish between sight (as something pertaining to the eye) and vision (as a result of the eye interacting with the brain), most do not. For this reason, I use these terms interchangeably. Georgina Kleege, <i>Sight Unseen</i> (New Haven: Yale UP, 1999), 22.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en349r" id="en349">2</a>. “Visual culture” is not, of course, a specifically modern or contemporary descriptor. The earliest uses of the phrase seem to occur in Michael Baxandall’s <i>Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy: A Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1988) and Svetlana Alpers’s <i>The Art of Describing: Dutch Art in the Seventeenth Century</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1984). As the titles of both works suggest, visual images have long played a significant role in shaping culture. What considerations of modernism contribute to these discussions is a new range of visual technologies (in particular, photography and cinema) that affect these relationships.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en350r" id="en350">3</a>. W.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;T. Mitchell, <i>Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en351r" id="en351">4</a>. For more information on nonvisual means of processing ASL, see my discussion of Tactile ASL in chapter 1.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en352r" id="en352">5</a>. George Veditz, 1910, qtd. in Douglas C. Baynton, <i>Forbidden Signs: American Culture and the Campaign against Sign Language</i> (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996), 10.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en353r" id="en353">6</a>. For more on the history of small presses in the context of visual modernism, see the introduction to Jerome McGann’s <i>Black Riders: The Visible Language of Modernism</i> (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1993).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en354r" id="en354">7</a>. In the introduction to <i>Downcast Eyes</i>, Martin Jay demonstrates the prevalence of visual metaphors by incorporating twenty-one of them into his first paragraph. Martin Jay, <i>Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought</i> (Berkeley: U of California P, 1993), 1. As Georgina Kleege has pointed out, such associations necessarily marginalize individuals who are blind or have limited vision. Kleege 18–23.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en355r" id="en355">8</a>. Adriana Cavarero, <i>For More than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of Vocal Expression</i> (Stanford: Stanford UP, 2005), 250.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en356r" id="en356">9</a>. For more on the specific role that photography plays in anthropology, see John Collier Jr.’s <i>Visual Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method</i> (Albuquerque: U of New Mexico P, 1986).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en357r" id="en357">10</a>. Ezra Pound, “A Retrospect,” <i>Literary Essays of Ezra Pound</i>, ed. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot (New York: New Directions, 1918), , 4.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en358r" id="en358">11</a>. Ibid., 3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en359r" id="en359">12</a>. Ibid., 12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en360r" id="en360">13</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en361r" id="en361">14</a>. Gertrude Stein, “Portraits and Repetition,” <i>Stein: Writings 1932–1946</i> (New York: Library of America, 1998), 294. “I cannot repeat this too often, . . . any one is of one’s period and this our period was undoubtedly the period of the cinema and series production.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en362r" id="en362">15</a>. For an elaboration of the relationship between bodily fragmentation and the cinema, see Brigitte Peucker’s <i>Incorporating Images: Film and the Rival Arts</i> (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1995) and Susan McCabe’s <i>Cinematic Modernism: Modernist Poetry and Film</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2005).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p174"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en363r" id="en363">16</a>. Marshall Berman, <i>All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity</i> (New York: Penguin, 1988), 5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en364r" id="en364">17</a>. Jay, <i>Downcast Eyes</i>, 14.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en365r" id="en365">18</a>. Michael North, <i>Reading 1922: A Return to the Scene of the Modern</i> (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999), 18.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en366r" id="en366">19</a>. Gertrude Stein, <i>Picasso</i> (New York: Dover, 1984), 10.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en367r" id="en367">20</a>. When Stein and H.D. are discussed together, it is nearly always in relation to their gender or sexuality, rather than in comparisons of their comments on the meaning of linguistic images.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en368r" id="en368">21</a>. Margaret Dickie, <i>On the Modernist Long Poem</i> (Iowa City: U of Iowa P, 1986), 8.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en369r" id="en369">22</a>. Ezra Pound, “Date Line,” <i>Literary Essays of Ezra Pound</i>, ed. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot (New York: New Directions, 1918), 86.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en370r" id="en370">23</a>. William Stokoe, “Syntactic Dimensionality: Language in Four Dimensions,” paper presented at the New York Academy of Sciences, 1979. Qtd. in Oliver Sacks, <i>Seeing Voices</i> (New York: Random House, 2000), 71–72.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en371r" id="en371">24</a>. For more on Bauman’s analysis of the cinematic elements of ASL, see H-Dirksen L. Bauman, “Getting out of Line: Toward a Visual and Cinematic Poetics of ASL,” <i>Signs and Voices: Deaf Culture, Identity, Language, and Arts</i>, ed. Kristin A. Lindgren, Doreen DeLuca, and Donna Jo Napoli (Washington, DC: Gallaudet UP, 2008), 163–176. In the chapter, he provides a cinematic (shot-by-shot) analysis of Clayton Valli’s poem “Snowflake.” For more on the historical development of film (particularly recording technology) and its impact on Deaf culture, see Christopher Krentz’s “The Camera as Printing Press: How Film has Influenced ASL Literature,” <i>Signing the Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature</i>, ed. H-Dirksen L. Bauman, Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: U of California P, 2006), 51–70.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en372r" id="en372">25</a>. Austin Andrews, “Deaf Ninja,” YouTube, accessed 16 February 2009, <a class="url" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L91KVUXRBq8">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L91KVUXRBq8</a>, video. Because so little ASL poetry has been published in any format, many of the sources I cite are videos that have been posted to YouTube. The lack of an archive for ASL poetry is a problem that the advent of video and digital recording technology has not entirely ameliorated. I would argue that this speaks simultaneously to the ongoing failure to recognize sign language as a language and, therefore, sign-language literatures as worthy of preservation and to the role of face-to-face interaction in ASL poetry that I analyzed in chapter 2. For a detailed analysis of the politics and pragmatics surrounding the accessibility of ASL literature, as well as a list of resources available, see chapter 3 of Brenda Jo Brueggemann, <i>Deaf Subjects: Between Identities and Places</i> (New York: New York UP, 2009).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en373r" id="en373">26</a>. Pound, “A Retrospect,” 3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en374r" id="en374">27</a>. Ezra Pound, “In a Station of the Metro,” <i>Norton Anthology of Modern Poetry</i>, 3rd ed., ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair (New York: Norton, 2003), 351.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en375r" id="en375">28</a>. Bernard Bragg, “Flowers and Moonlight on the Spring Water,” YouTube, updated 16 July 2010, <a class="url" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHDO8d6url4">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHDO8d6url4</a>, video.<a class="url" href="http://www."></a> Translated by author. In glosses of ASL, separating individual letters with a hyphen indicates that they are finger-spelled. ASL gloss is a written English transliteration of signs produced. As with all word-for-word translations, it does not accurately reflect the actual meaning of the language used by the signer. As I explained in chapter 1, I have attempted to provide more conceptually accurate interpretations of the poems <a class="page" id="p175"></a>that hopefully gesture toward some of their linguistic complexity. Glossing that is not contextualized can be controversial because it suggests that the signer is producing broken English, reaffirming the mistaken belief that ASL is nothing more than “English on the hands.” I use glossing here to draw a distinction between Bragg’s presentation of the title (in signed English) and the poem (in ASL), as well as the distinctions between description and enactment or presentation suggested by this contrast.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en376r" id="en376">29</a>. In a brief but important discussion of imagism and ASL in <i>Concerto for the Left Hand</i>, Michael Davidson emphasizes the significance of the ability of ideogram (as inaccurately interpreted first by Ernest Fennollosa and later, through him, Ezra Pound) to “fuse both temporality (the characters map a sequence of actions) and space (the character combines several discrete images) in a single sign.” Michael Davidson, <i>Concerto for the Left Hand: Disability and the Defamiliar Body</i> (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008), 105. Going on to describe a series of translations of Fennollosa’s images by the Flying Words Project into ASL, Davidson suggests that this “unit[y of] subject and object through the visual image” is similar to the unity in ASL “realized in a poet whose body is itself both the producer and text of his poem.” Ibid., 107. This particular set of translations (as in all ASL poems) do indeed collapse text and signer, but I would argue that this is not the same thing as the unity of space and temporality, the latter of which is expanded, rather than condensed, in an ASL poem or a linguistic image.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en377r" id="en377">30</a>. The signer’s hands bring action to the scene, calling attention to its flux and movement. In contrast to the idea of still life as a form of fixture or death—as in the French <i>nature morte</i>—this night scene is very much alive.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en378r" id="en378">31</a>. Trompe l’oeil techniques have appeared in painting, architecture, sculpture, and other art forms. Famous examples include Pere Borrell del Caso’s 1874 <i>Boy Escaping Criticism</i>, murals from Pompeii that depict open windows or doors, appearing to lead onto larger spaces, and the fake dome painted on the ceiling of the church of Sant’Ignazio in Rome by Andrea Pozzo in 1658.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en379r" id="en379">32</a>. Clayton Valli, “Dew on a Spiderweb,” signed by Ella Mae Lentz, <i>ASL Poetry: Selected Works of Clayton Valli</i> (San Diego: Dawn Pictures, 1995), DVD. The poem can be viewed on YouTube at <a class="url" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YaHChvFWegQ">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YaHChvFWegQ</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en380r" id="en380">33</a>. Translation by author.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en381r" id="en381">34</a>. Mitchell, <i>Picture Theory</i>, 152.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en382r" id="en382">35</a>. Heidegger describes a similar relation between language and being in “The Nature of Language” when he postulates, “Experience means <i>eundo assequi</i>, to obtain something along the way, to attain something by going on a way. What is it that the poet reaches? Not mere knowledge. He obtains entrance into the relation of word to thing. . . . The word itself is the relation which in each instance retains the thing within itself in such a manner that it ‘is’ a thing.” Martin Heidegger, “The Nature of Language,” <i>On the Way to Language</i>, trans. Peter D. Hertz (New York: HarperCollins, 1971), 66. Similarly, in “The Origin of the Work of Art,” he asserts, “language, by naming beings for the first time, first brings beings to word and to appearance.” Heidegger, “The Origin of the Work of Art,” <i>Poetry, Language, Thought</i>, trans. Albert Hofstadter (New York: HarperCollins, 1971), 71. For Heidegger, it is this experience of thinging that relates art (and specifically poetry) to the kind of truth that the structural indeterminacy of signed languages challenges. While providing a useful vocabulary for thinking about the relationship between signed words and things (or signed words <a class="page" id="p176"></a>as things), the conclusions he draws from these relationships move off in a different direction from those suggested by signed languages.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en383r" id="en383">36</a>. The varying speeds of the poem’s sections are the only things commented on in the analysis of the poem’s poetic features provided on the DVD of Clayton Valli’s collected works.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en384r" id="en384">37</a>. For an excellent and exhaustive account of imagism, see Helen Carr, <i>The Verse Revolutionaries: Ezra Pound, H.D. and the Imagists</i> (London: Jonathan Cape, 2009).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en385r" id="en385">38</a>. According to Hugh Kenner, as early as September 1917, Pound wrote, “the whole affair [the imagism movement] was started not very seriously chiefly to get H.D.’s five poems a hearing without its being necessary for her to publish a whole book.” Qtd. in Hugh Kenner, <i>The Pound Era</i> (Berkeley: U of California P, 1973), 177.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en386r" id="en386">39</a>. Amy Lowell, “Preface to <i>Some Imagist Poets</i>,” <i>Norton Anthology of Modern and Contemporary Poetry</i>, 3rd ed. ed. Jahan Ramazani, Richard Ellmann, and Robert O’Clair (New York: Norton, 2003), 927.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en387r" id="en387">40</a>. T.&nbsp;S. Eliot, “The Metaphysical Poets,” <i>Selected Prose of T.&nbsp;S. Eliot</i>, ed. Frank Kermode (San Diego: Harcourt, 1975), 656.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en388r" id="en388">41</a>. Lowell, “Preface,” 926. A first anthology, <i>Des Imagistes</i>, was published in 1914.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en389r" id="en389">42</a>. Glenn Hughes, “Note,” <i>Imagist Anthology 1930</i> (New York: Heinemann, 1929), 12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en390r" id="en390">43</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en391r" id="en391">44</a>. Ford, Ford Maddox, “Foreword: ‘Those Were the Days,’” <i>Imagist Anthology 1930</i> (New York: Heinemann, 1929), 13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en392r" id="en392">45</a>. Joseph Frank, “From <i>Spatial Form in Modern Literature</i>,” <i>Theory of the Novel: A Historical Approach</i>, ed. Michael McKeon (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2000), 787.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en393r" id="en393">46</a>. Randall Jarrell, <i>Kipling, Auden and Co.: Essays and Reviews, 1935–1964</i> (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1980), 130.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en394r" id="en394">47</a>. As Connor explains in the introduction to the book, her title—<i>H.D. and the Image</i>—is playfully ironic; throughout the text, it is her project to challenge the notion of the image as a singular conception. Rachel Connor, <i>H.D. and the Image</i> (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en395r" id="en395">48</a>. H.D., <i>Notes on Thought and Vision</i> (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1982), 20.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en396r" id="en396">49</a>. H.D., “Review of John Gould Fletcher’s <i>Goblins and Pagodas</i>,” <i>Egoist</i> 3 (1916): 183.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en397r" id="en397">50</a>. H.D., “Sea Rose,” <i>Collected Poems 1912–1944</i>, ed. Louis L. Martz (New York: New Directions, 1983): 5, lines 1–16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en398r" id="en398">51</a>. H.D., “Hermes of the Ways,” <i>Complete Poems 1912–1944</i>, ed. Louis L. Martz (New York: New Directions, 1983), 37–39, lines 1–9.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en399r" id="en399">52</a>. Indeed, the granite that Pound celebrated is named from the Latin <i>granum</i> (grain), for its coarse structure.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en400r" id="en400">53</a>. H.D., “Sheltered Garden,” <i>Complete Poems 1912–1944</i>, ed. Louis L. Martz (New York: New Directions, 1983), 19–21, lines 41–47.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en401r" id="en401">54</a>. H.D. repeats these ideas throughout the volume, particularly in the poems “Sea Lily,” “Evening,” “Sea Poppies,” “Sea Violet,” “Evening,” “Night,” and “Orchard.”</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en402r" id="en402">55</a>. H.D., <i>Trilogy</i> (1946; New York: New Directions, 1998), 2.13.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en403r" id="en403">56</a>. Ibid., “Tribute to the Angels,” 8.8–15, 36.1, 36.9–11, 36.12, 38.10–12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en404r" id="en404">57</a>. Ibid., 21.1–2, 8, 10.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en405r" id="en405">58</a>. Ibid., 29.8–15.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en406r" id="en406">59</a>. Ibid., 31.1–2.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en407r" id="en407">60</a>. Ibid., 31.5–7.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p177"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en408r" id="en408">61</a>. In <i>On the Modernist Long Poem</i> (1986), Margaret Dickie explains the use of the term “long poem” in reference to modernist works as follows: “Bare and simple as it is, <i>the long poem</i> as a term identifies nonetheless the single feature that most attracted the poet and made his work most problematic. Long in the time of composition, in the initial intention, and in the final form, the Modernist long poem is concerned first and last with its own length” (6).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en409r" id="en409">62</a>. H.D., <i>Palimpsest</i> (New York: New Directions, 1998), i.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en410r" id="en410">63</a>. H.D., “Walls,” <i>Trilogy</i>, 2.26–28.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en411r" id="en411">64</a>. Ibid., 1.1–3, 10–21.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en412r" id="en412">65</a>. Qtd. in Donna Krolik Hollenberg, “Introduction: ‘A Whole Deracinated Epoch,’” <i>Between History and Poetry: The Letters of H.D. and Norman Holmes Pearson</i>, ed. Hollenberg (Iowa City: U of Iowa P, 1997), 9.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en413r" id="en413">66</a>. H.D., “Walls,” <i>Trilogy</i>, 39.7–9.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en414r" id="en414">67</a>. H.D. “TTA,” <i>Trilogy</i>, 8.12.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en415r" id="en415">68</a>. H.D., “TTA,” <i>Trilogy</i>, 12.8–10, H.D., “Walls,” <i>Trilogy</i>, 11.2–3.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en416r" id="en416">69</a>. For examples, see Paul R. Lilly Jr., “Caddy and Addie: Speakers of Faulkner’s Impeccable Language,” <i>Journal of Narrative Technique</i> 3.3 (1973): 170–182; and Karl F. Zenders, “Faulkner and the Power of Sound,” <i>PMLA</i> 99.1 (1984): 89–108.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en417r" id="en417">70</a>. William E.&nbsp;H. Meyer Jr., “Faulkner, Hemingway, et al.: The Emersonian Test of American Authorship,” <i>Journal of American Culture</i> 21.1 (1998): 37.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en418r" id="en418">71</a>. In 1961, Eben Bass published a short note arguing that “the growth of certain images helps restore order, or time, to the novel,” focusing in particular on the series of relationships that develop from Caddy’s wedding slipper, the pear tree, the mirror, and the fire. Eben Bass, “Meaningful Images in <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>,” <i>Modern Language Notes</i> 76.8 (1961): 728. The article points toward, but is too brief to fully explore, the implications for these significant visual images as an overarching structural principle, which is what I argue for here.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en419r" id="en419">72</a>. I use the term “epic” here in the Poundian sense of a work “including history.” While the novel is more limited in its scope than some of Faulkner’s other works, the text is deeply concerned at both a structural and a thematic level with the relationship between the present and the past. The term “epic” also helps differentiate texts that incorporate multiple perspectives and time periods from works whose focus is on a singular character, image, or setting.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en420r" id="en420">73</a>. For graphs and other visual representations of the various scenes that constitute the novel, see Joel Deshaye and Peter Stoicheff, comp., “<i>The Sound and the Fury</i>: A Hypertext Edition,” <a class="url" href="http://drc.usask.ca/projects/faulkner/main/index.html">http://drc.usask.ca/projects/faulkner/main/index.html</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en421r" id="en421">74</a>. George R. Stewart, “‘Each in Its Ordered Place’: Structure and Narrative in ‘Benjy’s Section’ of <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>,” <i>American Literature</i> 29.4 (1958): 446. Given this confusion, Stewart suggests that “the actual method of printing causes greater confusion than if Faulkner had used no ‘gimmick’ at all.” Ibid. In 2012, the Folio Society produced a limited (1,480 copies) run of the text following Faulkner’s original color plan. It cost $345 and almost instantly sold out.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en422r" id="en422">75</a>. William Faulkner, “Interview with Jean Stein vanden Heuvel,” <i>The Sound and the Fury: Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. David Minter (New York: Norton, 1994), 233.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en423r" id="en423">76</a>. William Faulkner, “Class Conferences at the University of Virginia,” March 13, 1957, <i>The Sound and the Fury: Norton Critical Edition</i>, ed. David Minter (New York: Norton, 1994), 236.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p178"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en424r" id="en424">77</a>. The full stanza in <i>Macbeth</i> reads as follows: “Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player / That struts and frets his hour upon the state / And then is heard no more. It is a tale / Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury / Signifying nothing.” William Shakespeare, <i>Macbeth</i>, 5.5.27–31. The line was also (and quite problematically, given its original implications) the source for the title of the 2002 documentary about cochlear implants, <i>Sound and Fury</i> (dir. Josh Aronson, 2002, DVD).</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en425r" id="en425">78</a>. Stacy Burton, “Rereading Faulkner: Authority, Criticism, and <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>,” <i>Modern Philology</i> 98.4 (2001): 619.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en426r" id="en426">79</a>. William Faulkner, <i>The Sound and the Fury</i> (New York: Vintage, 1990), 4–5.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en427r" id="en427">80</a>. Jean-Paul Sartre, “On <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>: Time in the Work of Faulkner,” <i>The Sound and the Fury: Norton Critical Edition</i>, 2nd ed., ed. David Minter (New York: Norton, 1994), 269.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en428r" id="en428">81</a>. Ibid., 267.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en429r" id="en429">82</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0011.xhtml#en430r" id="en430">83</a>. Faulkner, <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>, 14.</p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <h2 class="ah" id="ahnotes06">Epilogue: The Textual Body</h2>

    <div class="notes">
      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en431r" id="en431">1</a>. As early as 1995, according to Mary Rosner and T.&nbsp;R. Johnson, there were already three dominant metaphors in place for discussing the Human Genome Project and modes of interpreting the genome: “nature as book or library; scientist as collector and interpreter,” “nature as machine; scientist as mechanic,” and nature as the unexplored country; scientist as explorer.” Mary Rosner and T.&nbsp;R. Johnson, “Telling Stories: Metaphors of the Human Genome Project,” <i>Hypatia</i> 10.4 (1995): 107, 110, 115.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en432r" id="en432">2</a>. National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institute of Health, “Human Genome Project,” March 2014, <a class="url" href="http://report.nih.gov/NIHfactsheets/ViewFactSheet.aspx?csid=45&amp;key=H#H">http://report.nih.gov/NIHfactsheets/ViewFactSheet.aspx?csid=45&amp;key=H#H</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en433r" id="en433">3</a>. James C. Wilson, “(Re)Writing The Genetic Body-Text: Disability, Textuality, and the Human Genome Project,” <i>Cultural Critique</i> 50 (2002):25. The biologist Steve Jones similarly explains genetics in linguistic terms: “The language of the genes has a simple alphabet, not with 26 letters but just four. These are the four different DNA bases . . . (A, G, C and T for short). The bases are arranged in words of three letters such as CGA or TGG. . . . It is possible to write a meaningful sentence with 25 letters instead of 26, but only just. Life manages with a mere four.” Steve Jones, <i>The Language of Genes</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1995), 15–16.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en434r" id="en434">4</a>. Wilson is primarily concerned with the ways that describing genetic variance in terms of textual errors reinscribes the medical model by positioning disability as a mistake in need of editing.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en435r" id="en435">5</a>. Hart Crane, “General Aims and Theories,” <i>Hart Crane: Complete Poems and Selected Letters</i>, ed. Langdon Hammer (New York: Library of America, 2006), 161.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en436r" id="en436">6</a>. Ibid.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en437r" id="en437">7</a>. Richard Lewontin and Richard Levins, <i>Biology under the Influence: Dialectical Essays on Ecology, Agriculture and Health</i> (New York: Monthly Review P, 2007), 245.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en438r" id="en438">8</a>. Genesis 1:26. Eduardo Kac, <i>Genesis</i>, March 2014, <a class="url" href="http://www.ekac.org/geninfo2.html">http://www.ekac.org/geninfo2.html</a>. Kac has explained that he selected Morse code because, “as first employed in radiotelegraphy, it represented the dawn of the information age—the genesis of global communications.” (Genesis website)</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="page" id="p179"></a><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en439r" id="en439">9</a>. The mutated genetic coding and Morse code read as follows:</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">CTCCGCGTACTGCTGTCACCCCGCTGCCCTGCATCC</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">GTTTGTTGCCGTCGCCGTTTGTCATTTGCCCTGCGC</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">TCATGCCCCGCACCTCGCCGCCCGCCCCATTTCCTC</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">ATGCCCCGCACCCGCGCTACTGTCGTCCATTTGCCC</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">TGCGCTCATGCCCCGCACCTCGTTTGCTTGCTCCAT</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">TTGCCTCATGCCCCGCACTGCCGCTCACTGTCGTCC</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">ATTTGCCCTGCGCTCACGCCCTGCGCTCGTCTTACT</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">CCGCCGCCCTGCCGTCGTTCATGCCCCGCCGTCGTT</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">CATGCCCCGCTGTACCGTTTGCCCTGCGCCCACCTG</p>

        <p class="ntbqf">CTACGTTTGTCATGCCCCGCACGCTGCTCGTGCCCC</p>

        <p class="ntbqs">.-.. . -/.- .- -./..…-…- ./-..—-—.. -. ..—- -./—-…- . .-./-.… ./..-. ...….../—-..-./-.… ./..…-/.- -. -../—-…- . .-./-.… ./..-.—- .—.-../—- ..-./-.… ./.- .. .-./.- -. -../—-…- . .-./.…- . .-. -.—/.-.. ..…- .. -.—./-.… .. -.—./-.… .- -/..—-…- .…/..- .-/.—- -./-.… ./. .- .-.—....</p>

        <p class="enp">Kac Web, “Genesis: Translated from the Mutated Gene to English,” n.d., <a class="url" href="http://www.ekac.org/translated.html">http://www.ekac.org/translated.html</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en440r" id="en440">10</a>. David Whitehouse, “Scientists Hail New ‘Map of Life,’” BBC News, 20 November 2003, <a class="url" href="http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3223318.stm">http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3223318.stm</a>.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en441r" id="en441">11</a>. Eduardo Kac, “Life Transformation—Art Mutation,” <i>Educating Artists for the Future: Learning at the Intersection of Art, Science, Technology and Culture</i>, ed. Mel Alexenberg (Bristol, UK: Intellect Books, 2008), 205.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en442r" id="en442">12</a>. <i>Genesis</i> consists of four other sets of art: “Encryption Stones,” “Fossil Folds,” “In Our Own Image I” and “In Our Own Image II,” all of which continue the exploration of the indeterminacy that unexpectedly lies at the intersection of bodies, images, and language.</p>
      </div>

      <div class="endnote">
        <p class="en"><a class="ennum" href="../Text/Sanchez-0012.xhtml#en443r" id="en443">13</a>. Mel Y. Chen, <i>Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect</i> (Durham: Duke UP, 2012), 53.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
